---
title:  A Name to the Nameless partII ch.4 "The Anahata Vortex"
tags: [A Name to the Nameless]
comments: true
layout: post
--- 

{% capture images %}
	/images/name.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
Up until the Anahata Vortex the human being is but a "raging bundle of desire in a dying animal," to use the words of Yeats.  It was said previously that the Manipura Vortex gives one an intimation of the infinite with its infinite desire for expansion, but falls short of the pure conception by projecting infinite desire on finite objects.  The Manipura at the navel is still governed by ontological hunger with its accompanying cravings, demands, and impositions on the objective world.  It can ask “how?” and then proceed to manipulate and maneuver the external world according to its internal desires, but it lacks the self-reflective conscience to ask "why?" or "what for?" in a deeply moral sense.  The Manipura Vortex is balanced only when it is under the guidance of the more conscious and moral Anahata.  It should be very clear to the reader that much of the present day ills in our materialistic and capitalistic pseudo-culture are due to the over activation and exploitation of the Manipura Vortex.  </span></span></p>

<p align="LEFT"> <span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> “Anahata” means not harming and it is at this layer of mind that truly rational, self-reflective, compassionate, and judicious human qualities begin to emerge.  It is the vortex located in the center of the chest and is often referred to as the "heart vortex."  It is the fulcrum on which rests the directional flow of the human mind.  Below here the mind moves outward, toward matter.  Here and above the mind can move inward, toward pure Spirit, toward Brahma.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The Anahata Vortex is associated with the Intuitive Mind (Vijinanamaya Kosa), the layer of mind associated with intuition and the aerial factor.  Instead of the Anahata Vortex via the Intuitive Mind being associated with the vibration of form, like the Manipura, it is here associated with the vibration of touch or impression.  With the Anahata’s functioning on this higher, elemental level it receives the subtle impressions, in the form of abstract ideas and intuitive feelings, which emanate from objects.  It has the possibility of perceiving a deeper idea of the essence of the object thought or felt upon, be it an object in nature or another living being.   The thought forms or archetypes of the Manipura, creative level are but manifestations of the original, formless ideas as they exist in the Vijinanamaya Kosa. The Intuitive Mind is the realm of pure ideas that Plato, Socrates, and the ancient Greek philosophers inquired about.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Although the Manipura Vortex and the layer of mind associated with it are endowed with intellect and creativity, the mind is still too preoccupied with the fiery, impulsive propensities that keep the mind moving outward, into the senses, which thereby prevent a deep, rational, and intuitive understanding of self and world.  The Manipura is about self-acquisition while the Anahata is about self-actualization.  Due to the relative lightness of the aerial factor and the self-reflective propensities associated with the Anahata, the mind is here able to reflect and gaze upon form from a more enlightened vantage point.  If the Manipura level of mind is likened to a fire that not only enlightens but also consumes the realm of form, the Anahata is like the lightness of a supine cloud that drifts languidly above the multitudinous forms in nature.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The Anahata is only the beginning of a non-attachment that leads to a transcendence of the separate, phenomenal self.  The individual ego and will are still present but much more self-reflective and non-impulsive than the Manipura.  Here the ego and the will become an object for the understanding or discriminative mind to reflect upon.  And it is because there is now an abstract self concept that is rooted deeply in the Intuitive Mind , the Aham can not just be conscious of the desires and propulsions in the sub-conscious mind, but also redirect those very same tendencies to more conscious and intelligent outlets.  With this capacity to consciously redirect the propensities that fetter the mind into crude mental limitations, the Aham is then able to reflect more upon the nature of itself.  There is therefore a much greater manifestation of the I-feeling or Mahat at the Anahata.  Instead of the self being bound up and defined by the restless, incessant activity of the ego or doer-I, the sense of self is now more of a witness of the ego's activity.  The “I” is still bound to the ego to a degree but it is lucid enough to know that it is independent.  This deep sense of “I exist” or knowledge of self existence can question what tendencies lead toward an inner state of harmony and self understanding and which ones lead one further into spiritual and psychic bondage.  In short, a deep sense of morality and conscience is born here; one much deeper than a mere superego that was imposed from without at the Manipura level.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> It is at the Anahata that we see the first manifestations of dharma or psycho-spiritual movement, the movement of the mind toward the spirit.  The sense of self-abstracted from the senses and extroverted will can more freely pursue the inner life and seek higher meaning.  It can understand the way the Tao or the moral order of the universe functions so as to conform the individual will with that cosmic will.  The mind begins to understand that it is only through becoming a responsible, conscious, and whole person that there can be any real meaning in life.  The life lived only through the senses and passions and superficial form is now seen as a great bondage that can never bring any deep fulfillment.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> As mentioned above, the Anahata is only the beginning of self-transcendence.  There is the abstracted feeling of the "I" that is ultimately independent of all objective qualities but the identity is still bound and mediated by subtle mental concepts defining the nature of self.  There is not yet the undifferentiated and pure expression of the eternal I- feeling or Mahat unmediated by the self-referential concepts of the Aham.  Although there is a great degree of the pure I-feeling present the mind still uses concepts to refer itself to the objective experiences that it is attached to [the memories, personal history or self-narrative, self-defining characteristics, intellectual and emotional qualities, etc].   </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> It can be said that the Anahata Vortex is the occupation of the mind with the "I."  The ego or Aham is not necessarily seeking to indulge in its limited self, but seek its origin in the Mahat's I-feeling.  The problem comes about when this fascination with the nature of ones consciousness is projected into one's finite self-concept.  All of the growth energy of self discovery instead goes into some form of egotism.  Vanity, narcissism, selfishness, and hypocrisy are the results.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Half the 12 vrttis of the Anahata are "positive," growth promoting vrttis and the other half are "negative" or at most neutral, self-justifying defense tendencies that perpetuate the ego's limited boundaries instead of expanding and refining them.  There is still a limited and bounded sense of self, but with the potential to discriminate between vice and virtue.  There is also still the boundary of self and not self to be overcome, although not as marked as in the Manipura and Svadhistana.  Harmony, balance, and proportion are key elements in this fulcrum that is the Anahata to help determine what is growth-promoting and virtuous (self, or good for the self) and what is vice, or inappropriate for spiritual self-growth (not self).</span></span></p>
<p align="CENTER"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"><b>The 12 Anahata Vortexes</b></span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">1. Hope</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The function of the microcosmic mind is always the medium between the inner identity and its outer world, be it a physical, mental, or spiritual worlds.  The Manipura, with its craving and blind attachment, attempts to will desired things into being.  With the qualities of the Anahata previously described one would expect to find a vrtti that helps bring an inner desire into being in a more discerning and less impulsive manner.  Hope is the inner belief that what one truly and deeply needs will manifest itself into being.  With the purest hope there is no manipulation by the will to bring the event about, but the self rather relies on the power of belief and faith to bring wish into reality.  So the medium of the activity of this vrtti (as well as others in the Anahata) is neither through the sensory and motor organs nor the imposition of will, but through the eminence of intuitive thought.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Of course people often hope for selfish and trivial things due to the pull of the Manipura vrttis on the Anahata,  but the propensity of hope potentially has the sublime function of giving one an inner sense of knowing, despite any lack of empirical, sensory experience.  When the Anahata is purified it has the capacity to understand the meaning and ideal of form in the deepest sense.  When the heart is pure one can intuit the underlying meaning of a given situation.  Here one’s own elevated thinking can apprehend the subtle, cosmic intentions that are being thought into being by the Cosmic Mind.  An inner sense of certainty ensues from this along with the belief that goodness will somehow come to fruition, despite the limitations of the personal will to force it into being.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The power of faith or hope is one of the most profound capacities of the human mind.  The reason that faith has been so highly regarded as a great virtue by all of the so-called higher religions is that it places the power of will into a force higher than the individual will and egocentric authorship.  It thereby helps to bring about the realization that the cosmic will is supreme and gives one even greater faith in the benevolence of the cosmic moral order.   This inner, intuitive certainty further inspires one to transcend the turmoil and incessant anxiety of a self separated from Brahma, the Supreme Self.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">2. Worry</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> While hope gives one the secure conviction that their own welfare is dear to Brahma and thereby relieves the perpetual burden of a fearful, limited self having to pine and struggle to assert its identity by coercing and shaping the objective world to its will, worry is exactly the opposite.  When one is worried or excessively concerned over an event or an inner ability there is a lack of faith or hope that things will turn out for the good.  The outside pressures or the internal inadequacies seem to be the causal factors regulating life instead of a hidden, intelligent order.  And because of this concern over the preponderance of outside circumstances and a lack of inner strength and confidence, the fretful ego may resort to its habitual methods of asserting itself.  Instead of a reliance on dharma or Tao to bring things into fruition the worried and separated ego reverts to using its own isolated will, mundane intellect and Sensory Mind.  Instead of the ego relying on the guidance of the quiescent eternal “I” or conscience, it uses its own mental projections of the objective mind to fulfill its own end.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Here the fulcrum has shifted toward the negative pole.  The pressures and strains of a more complex consciousness aren't directed to one's own higher intelligence and therefore the higher mechanisms (hope, discrimination or rational judgment) aren’t used to cope with the contradictions and limitations of the separate self.  Instead the ego may lean on its old habitual behavior patterns to deal with the more complex struggles that a higher consciousness must bear.  Here we have the misplaced situation of a mind capable of deep and abstract thought but only using those deep and idealistic thought processes to think about the difficulties of a situation while the activity used to solve the issue come from a lower, previous levels of awareness.  </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> This paradigm is exactly the issue plaguing the present level of human evolution. The upper end of the bell-curve of human consciousness is in-between the stages of the Manipura and the Anahata levels of development.  Although there is a great degree of this new-found self- awareness and rational intelligence, it doesn’t yet understand its own true significance (as well as that of others) and how to apply this knowledge to the world at large.  How else can one explain how intelligent and relatively civilized people use their shrewdness and technological understanding to ruthlessly exploit nature, manipulate economic forces at home and abroad, and wage war over oil?  This leap in awareness at the Anahata is certainly the saving grace of humanity but if that awareness doesn't incorporate and integrate the previous mental structures (the Manipura and Svadhistana), then all sorts of complex mental issues arise, such as duplicity, selfishness and repression.  This will be a common theme throughout the Anahata Vortex:  whether one uses one's higher intelligence to continue developing psychologically and spiritually or whether this greater development of consciousness and intelligence simply becomes a tool to exacerbate, exploit and perpetuate the impulsive vrttis (craving, blind attachment, sadism, etc.) of the Manipura.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">3. Endeavor</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Endeavor is the effort to unfold enfolded or dormant qualities of the personality.  We see that with the intuitive, Vijinanamaya Kosa that there is the ability to think in a very deep and meaningful way.  With this sublime ability the mind can probe into the deepest grounds of thought potential to discover and create new modes of being for itself that further the expansion of human potential and knowledge of existence.  At the Manipura there was still the impulsive hunger for expanding the mind in relation to its external conceptual world.  With the vrtti of endeavor the mind can expand itself not merely by assimilating more of its outer environment, but by finding inner, intuitive qualities that broaden and enlighten the concept of self.  Endeavor is the effort to discover who we really are on the inside.  Now that there is a greater degree of Mahat and therefore intuition, with a corresponding decrease in the externalized intellect, the mind begins to question what the “I” truly is.  At this stage the personality is very well aware of the limited ego-driven tendencies and seeks to know the reality and identity behind these limitations.  And it is only when the limited ego is frustrated with its external expansion and clearly sees its own bondages that the desire to realize its inner and fuller potential is aroused.  Here one truly sees the life of incessant self-concern, ambition, and attachment as the illusion of Self.  With the manifestation of Mahat and intuition one can look down upon the fray and ask "who is it that sees all of this?"  There is a calm, quiescent eye in the storm of the self and one begins to desire what it is and how to attain it.  Endeavor is quite simply the desire for the understanding of Tao, of dharma.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> However, this movement is endeavor to realize and not realization itself.  The ego here assumes the qualities and identity necessary to live in accordance with a deeper understanding and experience of existence.  It is not ensconsement and establishment in the intuitive life but the movement toward that.  Instead of the ego having an image of itself in accordance with its external desires, it now manifests the qualities that help in its psycho-spiritual orientation.  Such qualities are necessarily ones that help to understand, accept, and integrate the lower propensities into a more refined self-concept.  Such qualities are an acute awareness, non-judgment of self and others, acceptance, compassion, moral conscience and an adamant resolve to bring these qualities into expression.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> While discussing this growth of self it is necessary to mention the 3 laws that regulate the unfolding of higher propensities to incorporate and compensate for the lower.  These laws are recapitulation, transmutation, and integration.  It is clearly seen now how successive levels of development grow through previous levels and that the vrttis at higher vortexes are a similar though more refined expression of the lower vrttis. The vrttis recapitulate themselves in successively higher modus operandi.  The mind isn’t entering entirely new form as it evolves to higher levels; things are just restated in a more subtle way.   For example, endeavor isn't impulsive like its predecessor, craving [at the Manipura], but both have to do with mental expansion.   Due to the fact that there are higher, more conscious tendencies that correspond to more subtle levels of existence, there is by necessity a transmutation of the energy used in the expression of the lower as it moves toward the higher.  Endeavor requires patience and deep awareness, not forced and willful activity as in craving.  Vrttis are ingrained tendencies, mental instincts, that have evolved to serve an evolutionary purpose and so there isn’t a rapid, immediate transition from the old to the new.  The new has to be born into being and the old will continue to assert itself.  This evolutionary shift in mental expression therefore requires tremendous energy conversion.  This process happens unconsciously through an innate and expansive guiding faculty as well as through the will and choice.  One can decide to move along and follow one's inner voice that is leading the transmutation.  If not, then there is always trouble.  A factor necessary for the successful transmutation of the higher frequency of mental energy is integration.  The old must be incorporated into the new.  That old expression of energy must be entirely directed into the new faculty; otherwise the mind will be split in that there are now opposing expressions of mind.  This split may either to duplicity, a regression to previous modes of behavior or a repression of the lower by the higher. To use our previous example, the spiritually oriented personality propelled by the endeavor vrtti may repress his ambitious tendencies from his conscious awareness, but these old ambitious and willful tendencies still have an energetic momentum to assert themselves unconsciously.  He may therefore express duplicity or hypocrisy by saying one thing and unconsciously doing another.  A similar psychological dissociation of the lower from the higher was mentioned while discussing worry and will be dealt with more when discussing the vrttis of vanity, selfishness, duplicity, and argumentativeness as these tendencies reveal an incomplete integration of lower vrttis into the self-reflective, intuitive, and magnanimous potentialities of the Anahata Vortex.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> This dissociation of the newly emerging tendencies from the old, ingrained behavior patterns produces what classical psychology has termed the shadow.  The shadow doesn’t reside in one particular kosa, in other words it is not a layer of mind.  It is a defaulted mechanism of integration from one mental-emotive level to the next.  Whatever is not accepted and integrated and therefore either repressed or suppressed is relegated into the shadowy category of the “not me.”  For example, if the mind doesn’t have the vigor to make the jump from the Svadhistana to the Manipura, then the entropic vrttis of the Svadhistana become the shadow for the vigorous and ambitious mind that is trying to function at the Manipura level.  The entropy of the Svadhistana vrttis will complicate and confound the autocratic Manipura vrttis. The externally driven personality may suppress his/her tendencies that are associated with insecurity and lack of confidence. In a similar manner, if the jump to the Anahata from Manipura is not complete, as in our previous example, then the vrttis or cluster of vrttis that constituted the former personality at the Manipura become the shadow.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">4. Affection</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The affection of one sentient being for another as expressed through this tendency at the Anahata Vortex is not one of an intense desire to consume and possess another solely to gratify one's own appetites.  The quality of interpersonal dialogue at the Anahata Vortex is a mutual, inter-subjective regard.  There is a love based on the deeply human qualities of another.  It is not completely selfless, however.  Here there is still a desire to hold onto the qualities of another because of the deep meaning (artha) that is given.  This form of attachment isn't to satiate one’s hunger for external expansion but is a fondness for the other based on the way that others affect them in a deep and soulful way. With affection one's heart is touched by another.  The inner qualities of another are loved by means of the deeper qualities of the one who loves.  In this dialogue the one who is loved is regarded for who they really are on the inside and the lover exercises and discovers more of his/her deeply human affective capacities.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Human love, whether intimate and romantic, familial, or brotherly has such a tremendous hold over us that it both liberates our hearts from self-enclosure while at the same time holds us only to those that we personally love.  Affection must be perfectly balanced in order to bring happiness, otherwise it breeds suffering.  It brings happiness when the regard we have for others supersedes our own selfish wants and demands and thereby propels us beyond self-interest.  Affection always leads to obstacles when it is exploited. This is done by placing the importance of the personal meaning that it gives us and the demand to keep receiving it over the true needs of others.  In the words of William Blake, “Love seeketh not itself to please, nor for itself hath any care. It gladly gives itself with ease and creates a heaven in hell's despair.”</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Many love only to receive love and recognition from others without giving much themselves.  Only when affection reaches a functional synergy or symbiosis where both the lover and the loved interchange roles freely, both harmoniously giving and receiving, that a person can truly begin to realize the higher function of love.  Human love in all of its forms is an intimation, an emerging expression of divine love.  Love is the only seed of spirituality.  One who is loved feels worthy and whole, regarded and respected.  The one who loves sees the power of transformation upon another by and from their own emotive forces within.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Once the person feels love-worthy by others a noble confidence and self-respect, or respectful Self awareness is gained that permits one to love freely, without fear, selfish demands and an imposing personal need. And are not fear, selfishness, and our personal demands and insistence the tendencies that reflect a lack of true confidence, Self awareness and self-respect, and therefore, a lack of love?  Only a strong and integrated mind can truly love.  At this level of personal integration one understands how love is the essential element, the magic elixir for the growth of soul that cures all of the fear, selfishness, and suffering in life.  One sees how oneself has been transformed by it and cant help but want to share it with others.  This is the culmination of personal love:  to love without strings attached and not to expect anything in return.  Love ceases to be a mere feeling or personal need but rather a spiritual principle with the deepest meaning and power.  When this stage is reached an even deeper and universal spiritual love can begin to emerge.  This more exalted tendency is at the Vishuddha Vortex.  Love and affection begins at the Anahata but reaches its fullest expression at the Vishuddha.  Here affection as artha (personal meaning) is fully transformed into dharma (universal and essential meaning).  In the end there is but one Friend, in many colors and many places, who moves through infinite love behind all our faces.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">5. Vanity</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> So it is now clear that the mind and personality affected by the propensities of the Anahata Vortex are deeply self-conscious, self-reflective tendencies that lead the person to a more abstract yet congruent self-concept.  The self-concept at the Anahata level isn’t so much defined by the physical body, its urges, and the grosser elements of its environment.  The mind and personality is abstracted from these levels and its focus is more mental and  intuitive.  The personality is informed by the deep and abstracted thoughts of “who am I essentially, unconditioned by my environment and what do really think and feel?”</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Vanity represents the self-centered triumph of the individual over the outward pull of the social environment.  The social environment demands conformity and a submission of the self to the collective. The process of individuation, contrarily, is the discovery of the true identity of the person. This represents the endeavor of the individual to overcome the fear of its own social alienation as well as the social censorship for moving away from the dominant social paradigms that have conditioned the emerging, evolving self into limited self-concepts and narrow social boundaries.  This process is natural and healthy in the evolution of mind back toward Spirit; it seeks the unbounded knowledge, being and bliss of its essential, unconditioned, and uncreated essence.  Vanity, however, represents the incomplete and partial process of individuation.  Vanity looks back on its growth and achievements out the entropic pull of conformity, insecurity, shame and weakness with a sense of self-satisfaction and proud accomplishment.  </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Instead of finding its grounding in pure Spirit or in its dynamic relationship to Spirit, the Aham secures a niche for itself in its own qualities, abilities, achievements, self-referential words and symbols.  In other words, the ego proudly identifies only with the objective, relative, and ever-changing qualities that color and qualify the pure feeling of I instead of the "pure and eternal I" itself.  However, vanity does not imply the bounded identity of the ego with its own qualities.  Qualification and bondage of the Aham doesn’t necessarily mean pride and vanity.  Instead, vanity is the aggrandizement and exclusive identification of the ego with its own qualities.  The process of the whole evolving through the part, or the Macrocosm becoming through the microcosm, is ignored.  The ego sees its objective qualities and proud accomplishments as its own, as its fundamental identity.  It is more than the confusion of the subject with the object however, as the sense of doer-ship (ego or Aham) is alienated and encapsulated from the rest of the mental being.   </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Here the Aham doesn't recognize its full mental, psychological makeup and gives no regard to the subtle evolutionary forces trying to express and manifest themselves through the individual.  The individual instead sees its own ego as the origin and be all and end all of existence. “I am the center of the universe.”  The true self is pure, unconditioned, and free.  Shakti's energy generates all of the qualities for that Subject.  With vanity there is the confusion of the subject with objective qualities.  The Aham qualified and intermingling by objective qualities is mistaken as the hub of the identity.  There is no wonder that vanity and pride are universally considered the greatest error and flaw possible for humans.  The Macrocosmic process of evolution and becoming through the microcosm is usurped by the limited ego with its claim to the authorship of this process.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> A fact that many people don't realize is that vanity is a weakness.  Its easy for one to mistaken see how accomplished people with vanity are actually strong and fearless people.  However, if one looks deeper into the dynamics and origins of vanity one will clearly understand that vanity is a compensation for uncertainty and fear and a home for ambition and compulsion.  In other words vanity represents the qualification of a more intelligent and conscious mind by the unresolved complexes associated with the vrttis of the Svadhistana and Manipura propensities.  The conflict of the doubt, shame, and fear with the ambition, blind attachment, and lust for achievement on the battleground of the Manipura seeks a shelter in a higher and intelligent form of awareness at the Anahata.  Vanity aids in the compensation and assuages this conflict by putting one's psychic energy into higher qualities and components of the self.  A more abstract notion of self-recognition emerges as the glory of the internal ego with its self-reflective ideas of itself are embellished.  Here the identification with one’s own psyche becomes the channel for the momentum and inspiration of the mind.  The ego may still qualify itself with its external achievements, but it is the internalization of these achievements by an abstracted ego image that usurps the focus of awareness.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The liberation of the spiritual identity from the mortal coil is the supreme good, the summum bonum of human life. This realization of the inner “I” is not the denial of the body nor the senses nor the outside world.  Finding a pure “I” deeper within helps one to live in balance with the desires of the ego that one is transforming.  Most of us are somewhere in-between; realizing that we have a internal identity separated from world and body but are still attaching this subtle notion of I with the objective qualities of world and body. Under these dimly-lit conscious conditions we are bound to the limited, imaginary notions of "me and mine."</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">6. Conscience</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> As previously mentioned the Anahata level of mind is the fulcrum on which rests the directional flow of mind.  If the Svadhistana and Manipura propensities qualify the Anahata propensities one may get an intellectually developed mind with a definite and abstract sense of separateness lacking warmth and moral conscience.  This aloof coolness is due to the fact that the intellect and abstract, self-concept is still preoccupied with the self-establishing propensities of the Svadhistana Vortex and/or the self-acquisitional propensities of the Manipura.  The ability of a heightened consciousness and personality with a potentially deep, inner life and capacity to think and feel deeply is in this state unable to use this consciousness to relate with others in correspondingly deeper ways.  The drives of the lower vrttis usurp the intelligence of the higher.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The propensity of conscience or discrimination informs the mind with the ability to use its reason to determine what choices and modes of being lead toward the growth and expansion of the inner life in relation to Spirit as well as world.  It can also discern what actions lead toward the confinement of self-centeredness and psychological stagnancy.  With conscience the mind can understand its potential for self-centeredness while at the same time be in touch with the intuitive ideas that guide the mind out of its limitations and towards spiritual realization.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Conscience, the ability to know what is good and just, is a propensity that is rooted in the Intuitive Mind.  Having a deep, intuitive ability to understand and peer into the nature of the self and the world enables one to act in accordance with truth.  The intuitive conscience spoken of here is the essential conscience, the conscience as Consciousness; it is the representative of Spirit within the mind.  Discernment, or <i>viveka</i>, is not the external, conventionally imposed script of do's and don'ts, but the inner voice and benevolent guidance of the eternal Tao. The higher order of harmony in the Tao, or Cosmic Mind, is intuitively understood by the Aham at the Anahata. These subtle laws are translated into microcosmic existence and harmonized with humane sentiment and discerning wisdom. . The principles of Yama and Niyama serve as guidelines to develop this natural, moral conscience that is guided by the Intuitive Mind.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">7. Emptiness</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> There are 3 main degrees of depression that can be experienced.  The propensity of psychic stupor at the 2nd vortex is of course the heaviest.  It represents a crippling of the entire psychological foundation.  With melancholy at the 3rd vortex there is an entropy of the dynamic, extroverted propensities that link the phenomenal self with its world.  The vrtti of emptiness at the fourth vortex is, as the name implies, a mental depression in which the conscious ego experiences ennui, boredom, lack of meaning, and dispiritedness.  It is more of a psychic and existential malady as opposed to a mere crippling of the drives and instincts that characterize melancholy and psychic stupor.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The Aham feels empty not just because the world is not in harmony with the psyche but the psyche is not in harmony with itself.   The Anahata Vortex is concerned with the deep meaning of the phenomenal identity, of what the true nature of the personality is.  Psychic depression results when these existential needs are not fulfilled or realized.   There is only an empty, inner space. Nothing connects and integrates the self definition with itself as well as to other selves and society.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Essentially, this type of depression ensues when the ego is not in harmony with its conscience, the deeply intuitive ideas that link all elements of the personality together and give it inspiration and direction.  Conscience is the guiding spirit within mind.  It shows us what is virtuous and how to align ourselves with the spirit of benevolence or Dharma at any given moment and in any situation.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The flow and dynamics of mental life is not a chaos but a very refined order.  It is only when the ego resists this intuitive order that one can become confused, alienated, enervated, and eventually depressed.  Depression, especially when experienced existentially at the Anahata, has its own meaning and order.   It is in fact a wake-up call to be more conscious of what we are and how we should be.  In many cases depression manifests in periods of great transformation.  "Before preparing a man for great things, heaven first fills him full of bitterness and despair," a Taoist friend once said.  Perhaps depression, at least when viewed spiritually, can serve the purpose of making us more real, more aligned with our inner selves.  The duplicity and incongruities within the personality are undermined and disabled from further perpetuation.  So often the ego invests itself in socially constructed and uncreative images, in a superficial conformity to a conventional system, or just never explores or listens to its own inner voice that is always calling for expansion and transformation.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Psychic depression can root out the subtle forms of egotism and vanity in even the most spiritual of minds.  St. John of the Cross termed this type of dispiritedness the "Dark Night of the Soul."  It appears as a contraction and dulling of the mental faculties but underneath there is a spiritual process occurring that is helping a soul move beyond all of the limitations and boundaries that keep it confined to its separateness and self-enclosure.  And with psychic depression there is the ability to ruminate over why one feels heavy and lacks meaning, why things are just not going right, and to thereby find solutions. Our inner lives are never haphazard and meaningless.  Life is a constant process of becoming.  Each and every situation is an opportunity for growth-to exercise our discriminative intellect, insight and humane compassion.  Within us always is conscience, the voice of Spirit, incessantly guiding and directing our lives for our greatest good.  We need only to listen to and be true to ourselves.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">8.  Ego, Self-Identity</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Aham-vrtti does not refer to egotism or the vrtti of vanity.  Instead, this propensity is the feeling of one's actual identity.  It is the existential concept of what one's psychological make-up consists of, independent of inferiority or superiority complexes, of what the essential nature of the personality is.  It informs one of what are the innate proclivities; one's cognitive styles and affective tones, whether one is introverted or extroverted, a thinker or a feeler, analytical or intuitive, etc..</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> This self-concept is a notion of identity that organizes and structures the various propensities and modes of thought into an organized concept of a general identity.  Ego vrtti gives a thought-form to the notion of "I".  Although the "I" or Mahat is clearly manifest at the Anahata Vortex, it is still qualified by phenomenal reality.  The reality of the ego here is mental and psycho-spiritual.  Ego, therefore, is a concept of what the "I" is in relation to the relative world.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Deep and wondrous potentials are possible with this vrtti.  The human notion of the "I" is most often bound into sociological, national, cultural, and regional as well as the limited notions of the lower personality.  However, a great potential resides in this vrtti in that the eternal spiritual identity, Shiva, can find an abode of expression through the human personality. There is truly only one Aham in the universe, and it belongs to the Macrocosmic Mind. Only through association of the Macrocosmic Aham with the microcosmic chitta does the Aham feel that it belongs to the physical body and psychological identity. Maya, ultimately, is but a trick of the senses and the Aham who identifies with their relative reality.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> While it is true that the human personality is something relative as it is within the domain of Shakti, there is, however, the reflection of the fundamental consciousness that informs the notion of identity.  At this stage of the cultivation of the spiritual personality the objective qualities and concepts that qualify the Identity are not so much a bondage but rather a means of expression in which the ineffable Infinite Being expresses itself through the finite personality.  The objective qualities are transparent in that the personality no longer clings to outer, conditioned notions for self-reference.  Here one understands that the infinite Brahma, in itself, is not a personality with any qualities.  It expresses itself through the finer, subtler realms of the relative, created world.  Personality or character cannot exist for the Infinite without the limitations of finite definitions.  Conversely, personality cannot exist in the finite without the reflection of the subjective, existential feeling of I, which is Infinite.  Character, therefore, is the breeding ground of the Infinite to express itself consciously through a finite medium.  Of course all of creation is the progeny of Shiva, but it is within the developed human being that self-consciousness knows itself fundamentally as Supreme Consciousness, even though there still may be subtle qualifications of that Consciousness.  But without those subtle qualifications, the Infinite would not have a personality.  </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> All human beings are gods in disguise.  Only one who treads the deepest ground of their being and identity realizes that their life, their being, and relative existence is in truth a vehicle for Shiva to manifest itself in multitudinous forms of personality. The infinite gives a name to the nameless.  This is perhaps the sweetest and melodious truth of human life:  that human life is verily the Life Divine.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">9. Egoism, Selfishness</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> While all of the vrttis of the Anahata Vortex are related to the concept of self, half of them bind the identity to the limitations of self while the other half, the positive qualities, provide an impetus for the expansion of the phenomenal self.  With vanity there is an embellishment and pride with the qualities that one identifies with in an attempt to establish one's existential identity.  The vrtti of selfishness is similar with its fixation on the qualities of the limited identity.  However, with this tendency there is even more of a sharp and guarded egocentrism than with vanity.  </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Vanity is a limitation, but at the same time gives one a sense of pride and confidence with a belief in their self-efficacy.  One can have a healthy personality with good qualities but still hold onto a little pride.  Selfishness is more of a pathology in that the personality is lacking of true and meaningful qualities and instead of endeavoring to expand in soulful and meaningful ways, it fixes ones psychic energy exclusively on preserving the notion of self.  A proud person can at times step outside of their boundaries and connect with others.  This is more difficult for the selfish in that their self-concern and importance is not just to polish off and refine the personality.  Rather it is a defense that helps to hold together the integrity of a weak ego structure.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Very often this vrtti is found to work in accordance with the vrttis of the second vortex.  Resentment, compulsion, repression (of the 2nd vortex) are all propensities that hold together the integrity of the ego's foundation.  If the ego isn't well integrated and the 3rd and 4th vortex vrttis haven’t integrated and compensated for the second vortex, then the 4th vortex personality will be very contracted.  The potential for psychic expansion at the Anahata Vortex will be concentrated on the security of a fragile self-concept that is perpetually insecure.  The character of such a person is often aloof, distrustful, and vacillates between a constrained emotional detachment and a repression of infantile tendencies and a compulsion to act upon them.  One also maintains a very marked self-other boundary that keeps others at a safe distance.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">10. Duplicity</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Whenever the personality makes a jump from one vortex to the next there is of necessity a shift of psychic energy as well as the objectives of that psychic energy.  A healthy evolutionary leap from one vortex to the next would gradually incorporate the lower tendencies into the higher.  As we have seen there is a recapitulation of prior tendencies in successively subtler forms.  If the old patterns of expression is not transmuted and integrated into the new, then a split within the personality occurs.  The lower tendencies exist and function at the same time as the higher.  And because there is a great difference in thematic structure at each vortex, there are therefore very definite incongruities in such a personality.  What was once the major them of a particular vortex becomes the unconscious shadow of the next higher vortex.  For example, the propensities of the 3rd vortex that were not incorporated into the Anahata level of personality become the shadow for that personality.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The tendency of duplicity or hypocrisy manifests itself when the Anahata-intelligence of the personality is unable to fully integrate the lower, now unconscious propensities, of the vortexes preceding it.  Instead of the Anahata Vortex being able to transmute the psychic energy of the lower propensities into one of its own, the mind at this level tries to mask, deny, distort, or suppress these incongruent tendencies.  Here we may have the case of a personality endowed with some finer, conscious qualities and intelligence; for example a little moral conscience, a warm affection for others, as well as a spiritual outlook on life.  This same personality, however, still contains remnants of a previous pattern of mental functioning that run contrary to the current sense of being.  Instead of consciously recognizing and working to integrate these disparate tendencies into a harmonious and conscious synthesis the mind can use its cognitive abilities to distort and mask these contrary tendencies and thereby permit them to exist side by side with the conscious personality or ego.   Different environments will bring out these different, opposing tendencies.   In one environment one may behave in an uninhibited manner, expressing what is normally unexpressed, while in another one may act according to social protocol.  What is meant here is not the expression of different facets of the personality that actually accord to a current situation.   Instead duplicity is the act of covering up, putting up a show or "persona" to cover up an undesirable inner reality.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> This mixing of antithetical positions within the same mind causes the cognition to cover both fields, "to hunt with the hounds as well as run with the hares."  At one time the assertions, compulsions, hatred, etc. can assert itself.  At another time one is kind and fair.  Duplicity is when the kind and fair side refuses to really recognize its shadowy counterpart.  Or perhaps its the stable side of the personality with its seemingly confident sense of identity that distorts or denies a weak and insecure part of the personality.  Duplicity can manifest itself in various ways.  What is central to this tendency is that it is an attempt at keeping two antithetical forces from clashing with each other.  At the same time this tendency is a block to integration and wholeness that is possible at the Anahata Vortex.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Duplicity manifests as hypocrisy when the more intelligent part of the being recognizes its inferior parts but attempts to compensate for them by setting up higher standards that cannot possibly be met by a dual and divided mind.  For example, such a person may express may express crude and lewd behavior in the company of his friends, but denounce that same behavior while at work or church in order to uphold a persona of social respectability.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="color: #37404e;"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Duplicity is all too easily found in religious groups where insecure people have the need for others to guide or influence them spiritually. Without even mentioning sexual deviance, there is still a mountain of dangerous examples of duplicity in religion. Duplicity allows hidden tendencies to burrow deep into these minds while the “demons” of spiritual vanity and the desire to manipulate and control others become the primary objective. Once good intentionality has degenerated, what virtue is left to protect one from the darkest parts of the shadow? Its the same situation whether they wear white collars or orange robes or rattle off scriptural sayings in Latin or Sanskrit: people that deceive and harm others spiritually through their hypocrisy have very hard falls into perversion. What was repressed and hidden becomes so painfully evident after a fall. Spiritually-minded people with discernment, or viveka, cannot tolerate these activities and belong to any groups that lie and cover up these truths. A spiritually conscious person either has to get out of the web of lies or become an agitator or revolutionary, a “heretic.” Insight must extend beyond the names and forms of religion. “It is alright to be born into a sect, but not to die in one”, said Vivekananda.
It is natural to have duality in human existence. Sometimes we are strong and other times we are weak and cannot resist negative tendencies. There is so much uncertainty in deeper existential matters and values. Duplicity, however, is when the mind censors and covers up the inconvenient truths by fractioning off and compartmentalizing the personality into a false image. This image is untrue in that it is an argumentation against another, undesirable part of one’s being. One declares war upon oneself. Natural duality and indecision take on a distorted belief system about oneself where only one side of the dual equation is true. The more one represses and distorts the shadow, the more of a “true believer” one becomes. Fanaticism and a lot of argumentation is needed to quell the shadow. It takes a lot of internal psychological work and/or spiritual practice to integrate the disparate parts of the personality and become whole. And this is only possible with a very positive view of existence that permits the shadow to dissolve in this light little by little.
Instead of becoming whole and congruent, duplicity loves to project its inner, repressed tensions of conscience onto some “other”. Instead of seeing what is vile and low inside oneself it is much easier to find a scape-goat outside of oneself. Be careful entering into the shadow area of another, whether it is an individual or a collective society. Projections of the shadow are the perfect medium to transfer one’s own dark side onto another. The “other”, the “enemy” may turn out to be the revealer of truth, however. It may be your best friend in that one can really begin to understand this unconscious game of shadow projection that has the whole world going insane.
The complete purification of this vrtti of duplicity “opens” the right, solar side of the Anahata Vortex and allows one to contemplate the pure “I” at its seat in the human spiritual heart. Without this vrtti of duplicity vibrating and bifurcating the right side of the anahata, the Vedantic sages contemplated the pure Self in the right side of the chest where it radiates outward in innocence and purity.</span></span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">11. Argumentation</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> When a person encounters doubt either about an aspect of himself or herself or an opinion or view of the world, a sure and certain way of sustaining one's view or opinion is to defy the opposition with an argumentative stance.  This propensity is a refinement of slander at the Manipura.  Instead of this vrtti viciously preserving the outward drives of the ego it instead preserves and justifies the intellectual projections and self-concepts of an individual.  </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> There are of course times when contention has its place, such as making a stand against wrong actions.  Most often, however, this propensity serves the function of maintaining the status quo of an uncertain and insecure ego by resisting outside thoughts that run contrary to its own system.  One argues not so much to convince another of one's views but rather to convince oneself.  If by argument a person can convince another of his views, then the fact that another has succumbed to his intellect and will is a proof that the intellect and will are robust.  This sense of intellectual prowess gives confidence to the uncertain ego.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Most people go through life with many prickly spines.  The ego is still an incomplete entity and it must struggle and contend with its environment as well as with itself.  As the sense of attachment to outside forms and images diminish via the cultivation of character. There is correspondingly less of a need for the ego to struggle to have to justify and preserve itself in the mental and social worlds.  Within conscience is the certainty and justification for all aspects of life.  Once conscience begins to express itself one's actions as well as thoughts are rooted in essential being instead of a vacillating ego with its tenuous attachments.  The more one is established in this discriminative conscience the less one is disturbed by outside thought forces.  Here one may exist as a whole, complete in itself and not defined and conditioned by the self-other dialogue.  Conscience, as defined earlier, is the representative of Consciousness in mind and is therefore rooted in transcendence, beyond the self-other dialectic.  Conscience is the fine thread that leads the mind out of duality into a unity of thought, feeling, and activity with the Macrocosmic Mind.  When thought and feeling pour forth from this essential being and the will acts in accord with this truth, ones actions are merged in the activity of the Macrocosmic will. "Where there is another, there is fear," says an Upanishad.  If one can exist in this unity with conscience and act with this sense of certainty, then there is never a need for argumentation, even if one is in the right.   Here one's microcosmic activity has merged into that of the Macrocosm and bears its stamp of certainty, as if approved by letter and seal.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;">12. Regret, Compunction  </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> When discussing shame at the Manipura it was discussed how shame is a result of the negative consequences of activity in the light of a punitive conscience or super ego.  Here one has transgressed the boundaries of one's externally constructed social conscience.  Regret is the feeling experienced when one goes against one's inner, moral conscience, viveka.  It is an inwardly induced feeling of guilt rather than an externally imposed feeling of shame.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The feeling of regret can help one to integrate the disparate parts of the personality.  Vanity, selfishness, duplicity, and argumentativeness may cause these incongruities.  With regret, there is recognition of the incongruity or egoistic defense systems that keep the personality from being fully integrated with the positive vrttis of hope, endeavor, and discrimination.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The whole idea of action and reaction, or karma and samskara, is understood when the balance between discriminative, judicious action and the reactions in the form of guilt or regret are finely balanced.  The law of karma and samskara is extremely subtle and can only be understood when these two tendencies (conscience and regret) are fully manifest.  Conscience comes about in its deepest sense when one begins to understand the moral or dharmic order of the universe.  Regret, at least in its deepest sense, helps one to recognize how one has moved against the grain and course of this order.  Of course, the law of action and reaction applies to all actions.  Every vrtti in the human mind is compensated and equilibrated for by another.  However, it is only at the Anahata Vortex and intuitive layer of mind that the recognition that one is constantly creating their own reality in the form of choices made and the natural consequences to those choices.  Once this is deeply realized one can intervene in this process of continually constructing limited boundaries for the personality and having to undergo the reactions and compensations for those activities.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> It is the self-enclosure of the egoistic state of consciousness and the perpetuation of that state by ego-centered actions and reactions that prevent the self from understanding its higher nature and experiencing reality as a deeper whole.  Instead, the mind is constantly vacillating between its ever-changing thoughts and sentiments that are rooted in its separateness from its Self, Shiva.  Even the well-integrated personality is a fragmentation of consciousness in that there is still a sense of separateness from the infinite and eternal Self.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> In its deepest sense, regret is the feeling of guilt at being a separate entity.  This is not the lack of confidence of the 2nd vortex or shame of the 3rd, but a much deeper existential recognition of the transience and impermanence of the phenomenal self: the self that that is rooted in the mind that is an "functional, ever-changing, and relative entity."  It is only when the mind realizes that there is a greater whole that encompasses its existence that it can seek to find that integration and wholeness.  Regret, therefore, can serve not just the purpose of congruently integrating the personality but also have a transcendent function.</span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> This transcendent function of regret arises when one sees the phenomenal self or personality as a "system of compensations."  As Emerson put it, "Human life is but a system of compensations."  With existential regret, one understands the dynamics of the cravings, blind attachments, vanity, selfishness, and duplicity that held the personality together.  For so long, over so many lifetimes, the fabric of the personality has been threaded together by such defenses.  These defenses only came about because of the underlying fear of existence and the corresponding urge for self-preservation.  Even the positive qualities at the Anahata Vortex are compensations for negative tendencies.  They are therefore still in some way connected to them in that there is still a feeling of separateness from the purest grounds of Self.  </span></span></p>
<p align="LEFT"><span style="font-family: Ubuntu;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Once one realizes that there is a deeper purpose to life than maintaining the relative and phenomenal ego structure and that perhaps there really is a god inside waiting to be born, then can one begin to let go of one’s bondages.  Therefore, the feeling of regret at having for so long struggled with infinite resolve to maintain an illusory, finite, and tenuous separateness can actually inspire the blissful feelings of self-transcendence.  Here one can let go of all forms of fear: the primal fear of annihilation at the Svadhistana, the fear of competition at the Manipura, and the existential anxiety of the Anahata.  And yet again another system of compensations opens up: a compensation to transmute all existential separateness into the united life with pure Spirit.  This indeed begins at the Anahata but continues ever so deeper at the Vishuddha Vortex.</span></span></p>
