---
title: A Name to the Nameless partII ch.1 "Tantric Psychology" and "Muladhara Vortex"
tags: [A Name to the Nameless]
comments: true
layout: post
--- 

{% capture images %}
	/images/name.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
The fundamental urge behind all beings is the endeavor to expand towards the Infinite.  From the rudimentary amoeba to the complex emotional and intellectual human being is this movement and expansion from its current evolutionary status toward greater, yet unrealized potential.  The infinite Consciousness itself has “assumed the guise of finitude” through so many and various expressions that consciously or unconsciously seek re-union with their essential nature.  This evolutionary march is only partially, and at its crudest levels, a struggle for self-preservation with its constant struggle for physical existence.  Behind all of the effort and struggle is the eternal play of the Infinite seeking to regain its pure state of  eternal repose in the Shiva-Shakti godhead.  Biological evolution is the mark of this divine effort, while sadhana is the final impetus to complete this cosmic flow.

It is not the purpose of this work to give an account of the entire Macrocosmic process of evolution.  The focus is rather on the final stages of Macrocosmic evolution as it is encapsulated in the development of human beings.  And even within the context of human development the focus will be more on the psychological and psycho-spiritual aspects of this development, rather than the simply biological stages of psychological development.
According to Tantra there are 50 main mental propensities embedded in the human mind.  The Sanskrit term for mental propensity, vrtti, literally means vortex or whirlpool.  We can imagine the microcosmic mind colored and qualified in the phenomenal world by various vrttis that distort and dis-configure the objective chamber of the mind, causing it to only see the objective, distorted images of the mind instead of the reflection of Shiva within.  They are the Tantric tornadoes that cause this great illusion, or maya.  All stages of relative, microcosmic consciousness are conditioned by these vrttis.  They are the veil through which we see many spectrums of reality.
Vrtti is often translated as instinct.  This is correct provided the term instinct is elevated from its common usage referring to biological and unconscious activities.  The propensities, or vrttis, are cognitive and emotive modes of functioning in the various layers of mind: sensory-instinctual, conceptual, creative, intuitive, and causal layers. They range from the basest of instincts and defense mechanisms for the primordial sensory-instinctual mind to the most complex, self-conscious, reflective, and intuitive qualities of the higher intuitive and causal levels.  Therefore, the 50 vrttis are modes of mental functioning that include all of the drives, urges, propulsions, emotions and subtle longings that make up the human mind.

The essence of the 50 vrttis are sound vibrations or “strings” in the Mind of Brahma.  The microcosmic mind with its 50 vrttis mimics the causal sound matrix of Brahma.  Sound is the most subtle material and therefore causal vibration for all of the other, lower elements.  These 50 causal sounds are not only the sounds of the human vrttis but also causal sounds that Generate, Operate, and Dissolve the created universe.  Besides being the causal forces in human phenomenal awareness, the causal sound vrttis also shape not just our conceptual, social world but form our inner, metaphysical reality.  This abstract idea of how this created universe is so intricately connected to human consciousness will be a little clearer after discussing the following chapters.
The vrttis do not function randomly and haphazardly but have an orderly, guiding function that leads one from gross to subtle levels of consciousness.  Their unfolding or manifestation parallels the awakening of the kundalini.  This innate intelligence of the microcosm utilizes the unfolding of the vrttis in the evolution of the mind.  When the ego needs protection the lower vrttis manifest to attempt to strengthen the fragile personality.  When the ego is ready for expansion the higher vrttis then begin to manifest themselves in successively more complex forms.  This unfolding expands from the physical to the psychological to the spiritual desires. This idea is quite similar to that of the modern trans personal psychologists, although the level of development continues a little deeper in Tantra.  The core of Tantric philosophy and meditation practice is the notion that the person who can cultivate the higher propensities to overcome the lower, instinctual and self-serving vrttis realizes the true and eternal nature of the Supreme Consciousness behind the limitations and separateness of the mind.

While discussing the evolution of spiritual consciousness through the successive unfolding of the mental propensities it is important to consider how these propensities function within the mind itself.  Again, stated simply, the mind can be divided into two spheres: the objective and the subjective.  The objective sphere (chitta) of the mind is connected to the vibrations of the universe through the senses.  It also holds these impressions like a plasma screen as well as the responses to these impressions in the form of instincts, feelings, thoughts, and memories.  There are 5 layers (kosas) in the objective sphere of the mind- Sensory, Conceptual, Creative, Intuitive and Causal.   They will be more fully discussed in the next part of the book.  The lower ones are of course connected to the cruder, material vibrations as well as the cruder propensities and layers of mind.  The more subtle and spiritual layers of mind are connected to the more refined levels of the objective world.  The vrtti vibrate the chitta and impose a pattern of thought, action, or feeling in the mind.  Our thought, feeling, and desire are all conditioned by these fine, vibrational threads.  Vrttis are mental archetypes that vibrate the chitta,the brain and nervous system.  The vrttis are therefore related to the control of hormone and neurotransmitter activities, which is a very important part of mental development and fine-tuning of the nervous system to finer states of awareness.  Balancing the vrttis is a central part of Tantric practice.  Lower vrttis must be transmuted into higher ones but ultimately the state of union with Shiva is beyond all vrttis.  For this reason Patainjali declared “yoga chitta vrtti nirodha,” or “yoga is the suspension of mental vrttis.”  When there are no vrttis on the pond’s surface it is possible to see the still, brilliant reflection of the moon.
The vrttis of the mind are situated in certain mental substations, vortexes, or chakras. The seven traditional “chakras” will be referred to in this work as “vortexes,” eg. Svadhistana Vortex, Manipura Vortex, etc.  Chakra literally means a whirling circle, wheel, or vortex.   Any given vortex is the sum of the vrttis that pertain to this greater vortex, or chakra. The vortex governs the expression of its vrttis.   These vortexes are figuratively depicted as lotus flowers with a specific number of petals.  The number of “petals” on the “lotus flower” of the vortex is the number of vrttis that vibrate a particular vortex.  Each petal is an escaping vrtti of subtle energy from the center of the vortex.
Vortexes are not physical centers.  They are part of what Chopra calls the “Quantum Mechanical Body.”  They have a physical correspondence along the spinal cord and resonate with glands and nerve bundles.   These vortexes are contained within the chitta, or objective chamber of mind, which has a direct connection with the brain, glands and nerves.  The lower vortexes are contained within the cruder portion of mind and are therefore more extroverted and instinctual as they are associated with cruder realms of the objective, material  world.  The more subtle, higher vortexes are more introverted in that they are contained within the subtler portion of the objective mind, and therefore reflect more subjective, internal awareness.    In the subjective chamber there is more intellectual, creative and intuitive expression rather than instinctual impulses of the objective mind.  With the grosser portion of the objective chamber it is like trying to see the reflection of the moon on choppy water while the subtle aspect of the objective mind is the reflection of the moon on placid water.
The section on spiritual practice (sadhana) will explain more fully the mechanics of the mind and body relation through the vrttis and vortexes.  For now it is sufficient to know that the propensities are located in certain mental substations, or vortexes, located along the spine.  The traditional "lotus petals" on the vortexes are actually the location of the various vrttis and the number of petals at the various vortexes represent the number of vrttis there.

&nbsp;

<strong>The Muladhara Vortex</strong>

The Muladhara Vortex is the base of the mind.  It is connected to the most basic, reptilian structures of the brain.   It is located at the very base of the spine, which in reality is the base of the brain.  All of the so-called vortexes really have their base in the brain, with corresponding centers along the spine.  Just as the reptilian brain is the most basic part of the human brain, the most basic level of the mind is the Sensory Mind, or kamamaya kosa, the layer of physical desire.   The Sensory Mind is the level of mind that functions with the aid of the physical body and its sensory and motor organs.  Mind is not matter.  Mind is a subtle entity.  Mind comes from Consciousness and matter comes from mind.     However, because at this level the mind is bound into a microcosmic organism, mind must express itself with a material body.  It is within the “solid factor” or material realm that there is a nervous system with cells, nerves, nervous tissue, glands, organs, etc.  The physical body with all of its components is the vehicle of the subtle entity which is mind.  The body undergoes changes as the mind expands just as the mind undergoes changes as the body adapts with its environment.  Within the Sensory Mind are all of the physical instincts necessary for any given organism to adapt to its physical environment.  The instincts of the Sensory Mind guide the mind unconsciously toward eating, sleeping, reproduction, and self-defense.
From here onward, I will use the terms Sensory Mind and the physical body almost interchangeably.  However, there is a great difference.  Although the Sensory Mind functions through the body's sensory and motor organs whose control-centers are in the brain, the root of the sensory faculties is in the objective mind, the chitta.  Without the sensory faculties in the mind, the body can't function and without the body, the sensory faculties can't function.  It is because they are interdependent that, for simplicity's sake, they will be used interchangeably.
The base for the kundalini or Shakti is in the Muladhara Vortex.  Shiva draws her upward towards his position in the crown, or Sahasrara Vortex.  All intelligence that the microcosm needs in its evolution lies dormant here in Muladhara.  Shakti, the force responsible for all of the waves on the vast ocean of Shiva in this great universe, has taken position as the root of life’s fundamental vitality.  She is the primordial energy that controls all forms of creative energy.  As Shakti of the Macrocosm she binds all things.  As kundalini, she liberates all microcosms from the Macrocosm in due course of their evolution.  It is the awakened kundalini or Shakti that devours all of the vrttis on her way up to Shiva in the crown, or Sahasrara Vortex.  When she arrives there, they are unified and the mind dissolves back into the Shiva-Shakti godhead.  All of this evolutionary potential lies dormant in the Muladhara base, just as the reptilian brain system is the base for higher mid-brain and cortical development.

Most of the evolution of life on this planet is continually evolving within the sphere of the Sensory Mind in the Muladhara.  The instincts are gradually being refined as the mind must adapt to changes in its environment as well as changes within the organism.  The mind and body always work as a coordinated team.  An animal mind needs an animal body while a more developed mind needs a more refined physical body.  Recall that the Macrocosmic Mind must manifest itself in a crude, biological form at the beginning of the evolutionary phase so that it can, in time, liberate itself from its own created bondage.  Therefore, even the Sensory Mind has, in latent form, the intelligence of the Macrocosm via kundalini working behind it.  The Macrocosm cannot manifest itself entirely in a crude, physical form.  It can only manifest its objective chamber of mind, the chitta, in a physical form.  Only with future evolution may the intelligence of the Macrocosm, evolving through a microcosm, evolve the subjective chamber of mind- the Aham and Mahat.  The intelligence of the instincts is guided and regulated by the Macrocosmic Mind.  Their purpose is to propel the organism's mind onward in the evolutionary chain so that eventually Self awareness can develop.
Contemplate the perfection of the Sensory Mind in pre-conscious beings.  A seed knows exactly when it is time to sprout and all of its processes of becoming a seedling and then later a plant are perfectly manifested.  A sea turtle knows, just after hatching from its egg, to go directly to the ocean.  Later in life it follows the planets electromagnetic vibrations to return year after year to mate at the same place in the ocean.  Or a baby mammal; it already knows that it needs to feed from its mother.  All of these examples, and millions of others, all function so harmoniously without having to think or learn the activity. It is truly the latent intelligence of the Macrocosmic Mind that is attempting to evolve itself back to its origin by means of microcosmic evolution.

<strong>The 4 Muladhara Vrttis- Kama, Artha, Dharma, and Moksha</strong>

The Muladhara Vortex is the base and relay station for all of the desires and directions of the human mind.  The four directional vrttis of this vortex are kama- physical desire; artha- or mental desire;  dharma- psycho-spiritual desire;  and moksha- pure spiritual desire.  An undeveloped human being has only physical desires.  A human with a little intellect and self-reflection develops many mental and emotional needs.  An intuitive person is always desiring to be closer to the spirit, while the most developed human beings long only for liberation, nirvana, or moksha.  The Muladhara is the fundamental “square”  that forms the 4 great directions of the mind.  This fundamental square has the basic qualities of all microcosmic existence.  All the possible states of microcosmic existence express themselves through this physical base.  Kama is the orientation of the Sensory Mind toward the physical world.  The Sensory Mind derives pleasure and sustenance from the senses.  The desires of kama vrtti are simple, hard-wired instincts that help us relate to the physical world.  We have hunger, fear, sexual desire, etc.  It is our animal, physical being.  Artha is the stage where the Conceptual Mind derives not just pleasure but its psychological identity and personal significance from the realm of ideas about the physical world and social environment.  It is more mental, conceptual and psycho-socially oriented.  One has a name, a job and an internal identity.  It is the stage where intellect or conceptual Self awareness is cultivated so as to grasp the nature of the world and the personal ego through more abstract concepts and subtle desires embedded in the creative intellect.  Dharma is the movement of the Conceptual Mind towards the spiritual, our intuitive development.  This psycho-spiritual flow of Dharma is the endeavor of the Aham-intellectual mind to comprehend the spiritual nature and meaning of existence.  One cultivates an intuition of things not physically perceived; deep purpose and meaning, moral beauty and an intimation of a divine order.  Moksha is the longing for absolute emancipation from the entire relative world, the ensconcement in the pure, unconditioned Consciousness.  Here the mind has traversed the whole spectrum of being and has manifested all of the necessary potentials to interact and understand those levels of reality. Having traversed the spectrum of human existence, one now desires to complete the cycle of existence, death, and rebirth by a return to the absolute and unconditioned consciousness beyond the scope of finite, relative existence.

It may seem strange that the Muladhara Vortex, the lowest station of the mind that controls the physical body and Sensory Mind, is the root of all human propensities.  One may ask:  "How is it possible for the subtler propensities such as those of dharma and moksha to be rooted in the Muladhara?"  All desire is a longing for expansion and liberation from limitations whether one is speaking of the physical, the psychic or spiritual desires.  The physical desires are an attempt to help the mind expand its arena in the physical realm.  The psychic desires direct the mind toward psychic expansion in order to liberate on from mental limitations. Spiritual desires liberate one from spiritual ignorance and existential suffering.  Even the desires in the basic levels of existence are  desires to expand from limitations.
Physical desire, or kama vrtti, is how mind expresses its longing for expansion when encapsulated in the physical world.   The Macrocosmic mind is the essence of the microcosmic mind.  All of its immense potential is latent in the microcosm, waiting with time and evolution to manifest this potential within this microcosmic receptacle.   The Sensory Mind is how the Macrocosmic intelligence expresses itself while bound into the solid factor and the physical body.  Mind, at this level, is dependent upon the physical structure- a nervous system with sensory and motor organs.  Mind, because it is bound within the physical sphere, must use physical organs in order to express itself.  A yogi who only seeks dharma and moksha still has a physical body and these vrttis condition the physical body in such a way that the body and the  nervous system can channel such tremendous spiritual force.  If the body could not accommodate these higher vrttis with their advanced cognitive and emotive modes, then we wouldn't have a body capable of experiencing higher states of awareness.  The human mind is an architecture designed from high above to relate harmoniously with the here and now of the physical body.
The root of infinite desire is present in the Sensory Mind but the mind at this stage only knows the physical world.   However, behind the physical longings are the longings for something greater.  Life and mind, bound by the force of Shakti in involution, must pass through this stage of evolution in order to unfold its higher potentials.
The microcosmic mind, as described by Anandamurti, is a 'relative, functional, and ever-changing entity.'  It is relative in the sense that it is not absolute; it expands and evolves.  Mind is relative and over-changing in that along its journey it can never plateau at one stage for an undetermined period of time, as its innate tendency for expansion.  And the mind is functional not just in the sense that it perceives, thinks, desires, etc.  However,  its ultimate function is as a vehicle to realize the Brahma, to reunite with pure Consciousness.
Each of the 4 stages (kama, artha, dharma, and moksha) progress and evolve out of each other.  Though they can run parallel to each other, a higher tendency cannot begin to manifest until a requisite degree of development is manifested in the preceding stages.  For example, dharma cannot begin to manifest until the mind has undergone mental expansion first.  It is quite unthinkable that a mind functioning primarily through the senses could make a jump to a an intuitive, psycho-spiritual mode of operation without first undergoing a great deal of cognitive and emotional expansion.

Kama is psycho-physical in that the mind is concerned exclusively with objective, sensory phenomenon.  Here, the mind moves toward matter.  Through clash and cohesion as a result of interacting with the sensory world the intellect and a self conscious personality develops (artha vrtti).  Intellect and personality manipulate and order the sensory world through thinking and will.   Artha is a system of self conscious and ego-bounded thinking and feeling that helps us find our niche in the social world.   As intellect and self consciousness develops mind begins to realize its own boundaries and limitations and seeks the means to liberate itself from these limitations.  Due to this inner tension the mind with its innate guiding and self regulating faculties seeks a higher order of intellectual and emotional functioning.   This greater self awareness can deal with more subtle struggles and challenges.  The mind is forced to look for answers to confusions and existential dilemmas.  New desires have caused tension in the personality and this self-reflective personality looks for meaning or artha in a more internal manner.  Intuition, therefore  begins to manifest with dharma vtti.  Intuition is nothing more than the refinement and heightening of the intellect that helps one see even deeper into self and world.  As intuitive capacity increases the mind is even less bound to sensory desires and the limited Aham-ego-intellect.  This intuitive,  dharma vrtti involves very deep self reflective and moral states of awareness in which one begins to realize one’s existential place and purpose in an orderly universe.  One understands that one is a spirit embodying the physical world
Intellect represents the power of the subjective mind over the objective sphere of mind and senses with its ability to reflect and reason about sensory phenomenon. Similarly is intuition the ability of the deeper, intuitive Mahat to guide the Aham-intellect.  Intuition is the ability of the deepest part of the Mahat to see with such clarity and insight the functioning of the Aham-intellect. It is thereby illumined in such a way that it begins to function at a subtle level closer to the realm of pure spirit and thereby perceive phenomena with a spiritual orientation.  At this stage the level of mental functioning is furthest from its most basic  orientation of kama vrtti and now tends toward the spiritual as dharma vrtti. The mind is "relative and ever-changing" and always expanding towards the Supreme Consciousness.  Its final desire is to move from the psycho-spiritual orientation of dharma to the purely spiritual union with the godhead.  Moksha is this desire to return home to the Infinite.  The Tantric concept of moksha is very similar to the Buddhist idea of nirvana.

Now  the basic functions of the mind at its various stages has been over-viewed.  Kama is sensory-instinctual; artha is intellectual or rational; dharma is intuition; and moksha is purely spiritual.  However, within these 4 general stages of functioning are very specific cognitive and emotive means of orienting the mind to the respective levels of reality on which it is functioning.  The other 46 vrttis (50 minus karma, artha, dharma and moksha) work within these 4 general directions.  There are many vrttis that express and work under the direction of kama, while there are other vrttis that resonate and express the direction of artha, for example.  One can imagine the other 46 vrttis as a spiral that ascends from the Muladhara base.  The 4 basic vrttis create their own particular vrtti that resonates and qualifies the other 46 potential vrttis.  As such, the Muladhara Vortex is always resonating with the higher vortexes, just as physical, material reality always resonates with higher planes of subtle matter and mind.  This concept was called psycho-physical parallelism by Anandamurti.
Within these 4 basic vrttis are encapsulated all of the other propensities that unfold or manifest as the mind expands and develops.  Kama, or physical desire, activates the propensities of the 2nd, and 3rd vortexes.  Artha activates the 2nd through 4th vortexes.  Dharma, or psycho-spiritual longing has mainly to do with the 4th and 5th vortexes.  Moksha, or pure spiritual longing, activates the  5th, 6th and 7th vortexes.
The physical body and Sensory Mind in the Muladhara Vortex remain in the physical realm of the solid factor under the influence of the 4 general vrttis.  The influence of the 4 vrttis simply modify the physical body to accommodate the level of mental functioning.  Kama flows only with the Sensory Mind and body and the senses simply serve physical desires.  When artha, or psychic desire is guiding the senses, the senses are vehicles for the intellect.  We can reflect and think about the external world instead of just instinctively react.  For example, the hand can react instinctively and withdraw from something sharp or hot.  It can serve as an expression and vehicle of thought when the mind makes a plan to carve a canoe from a log and the hand follows and works according to mental ideas.  When intuition or dharma is guiding the senses, the senses become very still, yet more alive and conscious.  For example, the physical hand may express graceful movements from elevated song, music, or dance that correspond to very deep ideas in one’s soul.  With dharma, the external world as seen through the senses is something very fine.  One can see through the play of the senses and see any form of separation in the universe as a simply play of the Sensory Mind.  We see the particular waves of sensory perception yet intuit that they are part of a vast ocean.  Nature is something beautiful and mysterious.  Something image-less is moving all images.  Only when moksha vrtti directs the mind is the Sensory Mind is entirely transcended as the entire mind merges into Shiva.
In the practice of yoga the Sensory Mind and its sensory and motor organs continue to play a vital role in cultivating the higher vrttis of artha, dharma, and moksha.  The body is a vehicle for the mind.  Tantra yoga is the science of using both the body and the mind as a vehicle for consciousness.  The practice of asana positions the body, with its sensory and motor organs, in such a way as to redirect the physically-oriented vital energies inward.  Even to reach deep stages of meditation it is necessary to accommodate the body and senses so that they facilitate and create physical states of hormonal expression that correspond with spiritual states of mind.

An important note must be made before further examining the specific characteristics of the vortexes and vrttis.  The explanation of the tendencies associated with the mind at each vortex are greatly simplified due to the fact that there is a very complex dynamic and association of all of the vrttis with each other, both within their respective vortexes and without. There is no absolute linear and isolated manifestation of the vrttis; instead, they all interact and qualify each other.  Although it is a general rule that we move from vortex to vortex, there are very complex interactions between the vortexes.  The following descriptions of these propensities are theoretical in that it is an attempt to explain each tendency as it is in itself, without the influence of the others.  While discussing the propensities of the higher centers or vortexes more reference will be made to how this complex interaction occurs.  If there were only 50 basic propensities functioning in all human beings without an intricate mosaic of combinations amongst them, then the personalities of humans would be rather simple and monotonous.  What makes each character or personality so unique in their complexity is the vast variations of the clustering of propensities that make up a particular mind.

<strong> </strong>
