---
title:  A Name to the Nameless partIII "The Essential Psycho-Spiritual Dynamics of Tantric Meditation"
tags: [A Name to the Nameless]
comments: true
layout: post
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/name.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
### Part III:  Sadhana- Spiritual Practice
Parts one and two gave a theoretical outline of the functioning of the human mind and its evolutionary status in relation to the cosmos.  Its general structure, laws and dynamics were discussed in a theoretical manner.  This section will deal with the practical approach to understanding the spiritual evolution of mind and personality.  Rather than further explaining the theoretical structure of mind, this section will focus on the spiritual disciplines that facilitate the development of mind.  In fact, Tantric meditation, as Anandamurti has stated, is 99% practice and 1% theory.  The study of theoretical metaphysics and psychology in Tantra is but a preparation for the intuitive practice of Tantra.  However, when seen as a preparatory tool to foster intuitive practice, theoretical study in fact becomes a practical exercise for the development of mind rather than mere abstract musing.  The purpose of the pursuit of knowledge is to directly experience spiritual realities, rather than merely philosophizing about them.  Tantra is therefore a “mystical empiricism”.
Rajadhiraja Yoga is traditional 8-fold yoga with Tantric techniques.  Tantra Maya is Rajadhiraja Yoga with Tantra Maya techniques.  The classic 8-Fold Yoga, or Astaunga Yoga, are 8 steps in the practice of sadhana.  They gradually direct the physical energy of the body into the intelligence of the mind.  This mental dynamism is further transformed into spiritual cognition, or refined spiritual awareness.  The lower of the 8 steps deal more with the lower kosas while the higher steps work with the higher kosas.  

### The 8 Steps of Yoga

1 and 2 - Yama and Niyama   
Anandamurti said that morality is the base of practice while sadhana is the way and the Life Divine is the goal.  Yama and Niyama have already been explained in the Svadhistana chapter.  The Sensory Mind must be purified by the understanding of Yama and Niyama.  Morality is practical and makes the mind free of vices and bad habits.  Such a mind can reflect upon the cause of suffering in the lower vrttis.  A mind that understands its own “irrationality” with the lower vrttis becomes very strong in reason.  By respecting the moral rights of others one learns compassion.  The use of intellect in order to comprehend moral philosophy also strengthens the dynamism of the conceptual (Svadhistana) and creative (Manipura) minds.  The development of these two layers of the mind help to disengage the mind from its entrainment in the Sensory Mind as well as prepare it for higher levels of thinking and feeling at the intuitive (Anahata) level.  
	
3 - Asana  
Asanas are yoga “innercizes”.  They are physical postures synchronized with deep breathing to bring a mindful caress of subtle prana into the body. They keep the body fit and the mind balanced by fine-tuning the endocrine system.  The contorted stretches actually massage and stimulate the muscles and nerves around the endocrine glands so that nerve signals and blood flow aren’t stagnant.  The breathing is slow and deep and the mind studies its relationship with the body and understands how the mental vrttis express themselves bio-psychologically.  One feels where the vrttis come from and has a more acute sensitivity to prana or subtle energy that flows within the body and in the environment.  Such a calm mind is more able to focus on meditation.  
	
4 - Pranayama  
Pranayama is literally the “control of prana.”  This is done by regulating the breath.  The flow of subtle prana corresponds with the flow of physical air in respiration.  When one breaths deeply the prana is calm and this calms the mind as well.  Prana is mental energy.  When it is not occupied with active states of body and mind it can concentrate deeply like a focused laser.  All of the energy that escapes through the vrttis is prana and the control of prana regulates the expression of the vrttis.  Without this expenditure of mental energy dissipated in excessive mental activity, this refined, potentialized energy can help focus the mind.  Normally it is the prana that vibrates the chitta.  Prana is an intermediary in the brain-mind relation.  Normally, we only see how our minds vibrate with the sensory world, but with pranayama we can understand how the guided prana through pranayama begins to color and qualify the interior landscape of intuition.  Pranayama gives one the concentrated mental energy necessary not just for deeper meditation, but for transforming the body and the mind.  The internalization of prana begins to change the entire nervous and glandular system in ways that are still far away from being understood by our physical science.  
	
5 -  Pratyahara  
Pratyahara is sensory withdrawal.  Once the mind is balanced by yama and niyama and begins to develop more rapidly through asanas and pranayama, sensory withdrawal becomes quite natural.  The suspended, quieted prana due to pranayama allows the mind to be very calm and focused.  The inner, subtle, intuitive faculties begin to awaken.  An advanced yogi can see his/her own mind so deeply and study the relationship between mind and body.  One can feel how the subtle body along with the nervous system create impressions in the chitta.  One can see them arise and also see them dissolve.  All feelings, thoughts, memories, and desires are gradually understood.  By simply seeing these vrttis from a calm, neutral ‘I” in the center of experience, one begins to see the processes that influence the unconscious conditioning, as well as the conceptual evaluations and judgments that go into our self-created, mind-born notion of “I am.”  The interesting question is who is seeing the mind these deep states?  Ordinarily the ego doesn’t process “reality” from such deep states of mind.  Who are you in-between thoughts, or when you are so calm and secure that you don’t even need to waste energy thinking?  These states of detachment from the Sensory Mind create deep states of joy because one isn’t simply escaping the outside world but accessing the interior kingdoms of cosmic cognition.  Here we can see how very balanced practice of yoga naturally leads one to deep levels of philosophical and mystical, intuitive thinking.
	
6 - Dharana  
Dharana is concentration on an object.  It is meditation on some form or concept that the mind can grasp.  Meditating on the form and color of the vortexes is a form of dharana.  Meditating on mandalas and geometric forms gives a certain focus and concentration to the mind so that it can begin to understand even deeper, formless ideas.  
	
So often one thinks that there is a great difference between empirical, sensory experience and thought.  However, when the power of thought is cultivated and pinnacled it attains a deeper level of intuitive experience that is in direct connection with the object of thought. For example, instead of thinking about a tree, the mind feels at one with a tree, feels it as a magnificent life force interacting with its environment.  One understands that it has certain qualities that can be used for healing even without knowledge of medicine.  This level of pinnacled thinking is much more unified with the object of thought than merely pondering abstractly in the same manner of the medieval philosophers that philosophized on the question of how many angels could dance on the tip of a needle.  Through dharana one begins to see into the world of ideas and know how ideas and the vrttis that support them are but creations of the mind.  By holding a thought form steady in the chitta, the Aham begins to see the essence so deeply that the feeling of “I am” becomes superfluous.  One begins to perceive the universe spontaneously and intuitively.  I have known yogis who could know discreet details of my past, things impossible for one to know except me, just by looking at my forehead.
	
7 - Dhyana    
Dhyana is internal attention on the I-Witness.  It is important to remember that the practice of Tantra is ultimately not for the purpose of the attainment of objective understanding, as in Dharana.   Dharana is a tool to help develop Dhyana.  The ultimate aim of Tantric practice is to understand the inner, quiet, I-Witness and thereby liberate one from the vicissitudes of spiritual ignorance.  Dhyana is a constant flow of mind.  It is unperturbed by external thoughts or formations in the chitta.  The mind is passive, “empty”, as a Buddhist would say.  It is not thinking on nothing, but rather thinking on “no thing.”    At this stage of intuition, one begins to feel the cognitive bearing or spiritual force of the I-Witness upon the mind.  Consciousness is the nucleus of the mind and by conceiving the existence of Shiva deep within the inner “I”, the mind naturally flows into the Supreme Subjectivity of Brahma.  One can practice dharana on form, but its refinement is to recognize the fundamental Witness beyond the relative mediums of mind, of which form is a creation.  Much purification is needed to transmute the obstacles that arise in the mind.  Tantric meditation must also cultivate the emotional, affective life as well so that dhyana isn’t a dry, abstract process.  Both thought and feeling, cognition and affection, are cultivated and elevated in a manner that guides the mind into deeper interiority and Self awareness.  Only when all of the vrttis that have been activated by one’s past mental flow are understood and processed, is Dhyana ultimately perfected.
	
8 - Samadhi  
As defined previously, samadhi is the experience of union with Shiva.  The microcosm that has cultivated itself with the first 7 practical steps will eventually experience samadhi.  Samadhi is the goal but it is also practice.  There are many levels of samadhi, each one corresponding to the raising of the kundalini to a particular vortex.  The kundalini or Kulkulkan is the energy of Shakti that dissolves all of the vrttis of the mind.  She created them and now she dissolves them as kundalini.  The kundalini is the force that ultimately “cleans” the vortexes by vivifying them with Shakti so that they resonate harmoniously with the rest of the mind.  Without vrttis distorting the kosas creating thought dissipation and disintegration of the entire mind-vortex system, the mind feels unified, aligned, and congruent within itself and with the Macrocosmic Mind.  Samadhis at the lower vortexes give access to the corresponding worlds or lokas of the Macrocosm.  Lokas are planes of being in the Macrocosm, just as kosas are planes of being within the microcosm.  By purifying the kosas through samadhi, one sees into the lokas of the Macrocosm and learns their secrets.  The succession of these samadhis depends on the degree to which Kulkulkan has risen into proximity with Hunab Ku, of how many concentric circles and vrttis this plumed serpent has devoured on his journey home.  Kundalini is the “fundamental negativity”, as Anandamurti termed it.  It is “negative” in the sense that it is a return force.  Shakti always returns to Shiva.  All things come from the Infinite, are sustained by It, and ultimately return to It, here and now.  Nirvikalpa samadhi is when all of the vrttis are purified and the plumed serpent of Kulkulkan rises into the nucleus of Hunab Ku, or Sahasrara Vortex.
	
The practice of Rajadhiraja Yoga with its 8 steps varies in degrees according to the capacity of the initiate.  One should begin with Yama and Niyama and Asanas.  Once the mind and body are more finely tuned with these practices, one can begin the others.  Together they all convert physical energy into mental energy and then further convert mental energy into spiritual cognition.  The practice should develop with the capacity to make these conversions.  A person who doesn’t understand Yama and Niyama will only harm himself with Asanas as they may give one too much unbridled mental energy.  Many teachers of Asanas without an understanding of Yama and Niyama harm themselves and misguide others.  Similarly, even a balanced-minded beginner with a natural sense of ethics must advance in the intermediate steps before being capable of deep concentration that  pratyahara, dharana and dhyana require.   All of the steps gradually internalize the mind.  With the internalization of the mind and the accompanying degrees of refined thought and feeling, the mind passes through  progressively more subtle kosas, or closer concentric circles.  While it is true that the ultimate aim of meditation is to understand who one ultimately is beyond these orbits around the nucleus, the mind has to pass through these various objective planes of mental being.  The lokas which our kosas perceive were created by the involution of Shiva into creation and in evolution our work is to find a way through these orbits around the Hunab Ku as spiritually conscious microcosms guided intuitively by Brahma.  Each one of the kosas orients the mind to newer, transcendent levels of being and then guides it to progressively higher levels until one eventually transcends the all of mental vrttis connected with all of the mental levels.  In this process of transcendence there is a continual transformation and therefore re-modification of the definition of a concept of individuality.  One cannot intuit the presence of the Supreme Subjectivity when the mind is bound into the more external layers of mind.  Instead, one feels that the objective layers of mind above their current level is one's subjective identity.  For example, a mind at the Anahata level of development (Intuitive  Mind), may not entirely conceive of its pure subjective being as Shiva, instead its subjective feeling is rooted in the objective layer of mind directly above it; in this case, the Vishuddha-Causal  Mind.  The Causal  Mind is still an objective layer of mind, however it appears as a subjective being to the layers of mind beneath it.  When one reaches the causal level, one will then understand that what once seemed as the ultimate subjective reality is now an objective reality.  It is now objective because one now intuits a layer of subjective being that witnesses even the Causal  Mind.  This progressive redefinition of the existential I-feeling continues until one arrives at the hub of the mind, the I-Witness, or Shiva. This process of successively redefining subjectivity according to progressively subtler levels of being that the mind operates on is termed manasphota- the "explosion" of mind into progressively higher levels of mind.  When the mind is refined to the extent that it explodes into the original substance of Consciousness or Shiva, the process is termed cetanasphota.  Manasphota and cetanasphota are the core processed involved in spiritual practice.  Whether one is struggling to purify the heart or concentrating on one's higher cognitive faculties, these two processes of mental and consciousness expansion are occurring.  
	
Nature has so perfectly designed the mind that via the unfolding of the vrttis mind is ultimately led beyond any form on bondage, into union with the godhead.  Dharma, the moral order of the universe conspires with its natural laws to bring all orbiting microcosms back into the conscious center in the Eternal Now.   Ultimately, Nature and Spirit are in coordinated harmony.  Recall that Nature is the result of the co-mingling of Shiva and Shakti and encompasses all of creation, including Mind.  Nature furthers all created beings by guiding them back into union with Shiva.  While discussing the Anahata Vortex it was mentioned that human beings have acquired the level of Self awareness that endows them with free will and permits them to make independent choices.  We can follow the spiritual and moral conscience nature has endowed us with. We are also free to follow the impulses propelling us toward blind instinct.  It has already been mentioned that our negative actions create samskaras or reactions because the mind has moved contrary to its natural course.  However, is there a specific activity or practice one can adopt to conform one’s life and actions with Dharma, with Conscience?  Certainly, Nature is there to guide us every step of the way if we can only listen.  But what about the times when we can't listen or if we haven't yet learned to listen to our inner voice?  The human being that has reached the Anahata Vortex has an intuition of the Infinite but is certainly not yet established there.  Therefore, the will is separate from the Cosmic will.  The world still seems "out there;" there still seem to be factors outside of oneself that determine reality; there is still a cleavage between self and other.  The world seems to be something one has to fear and contend with although one intuitively feels that there is a deeper harmony working to heal the conflicts between self and other, between inner and outer.
	
Sadhana is the use of all human resources- emotive, cognitive, and active- to conform the mind to the cosmic moral order that ultimately guides the mind beyond all bondages and suffering.  Sadhana must therefore be the most refined human expression in that is serves as the link between the finite and the infinite.  It must represent the apex of human intellect and intuition, the noblest emotions, and compassionate activity.  In fact, sadhana is spiritual life itself.  It is what makes one complete and fearless by providing the inspiration, wisdom and courage to struggle to transform one's lower nature and further comprehend one’s deeper sense of being.
	
Sadhana should never be confused with, or degenerate to the level of religion, dogma, or social convention.  Rather, sadhana should reflect the very laws and essence of spiritual life. The purpose of sadhana is not to provide a ready-made construction of the definition of spiritual life.  Instead, spiritual practice offers rational tools to help the aspirant discover for oneself what his/her life means in relation to Spirit.  The Tantric aspirant should have an approach similar to that of an open-minded scientist or investigator that enjoys his/her work and loves the pursuit of knowledge.
	
This is the essence of Tantric meditation:  to provide an experiential practice in order to help the mind grow and develop. However, one should not confuse the technique with the entirety of sadhana itself.  The Tantric techniques of the repetition of mantras, breathing practices, visualizations and so forth are merely functionary tools for the expansion of mind.  It can be likened to the health practices for physical life.  Jogging, walking, eating properly, etc. improve the quality of one's health, but the practices themselves don't constitute entirely the notion of healthy living.  It is their practical benefits that improve the quality of life.  Similarly, the act of meditation and yoga postures, while being joyful in themselves, do not constitute the entirety of spiritual life. The practices offer a medium to reach a pinnacled state of consciousness where one can experience oneself more fully and discover spiritual truths directly. When one comes close to the Infinite, all intermediaries fall away.  This is not to negate the importance of spiritual practice, but rather to say it is a means to an end.  Certainly, a virtuous and humble being can develop spiritually over several lifetimes within the flow of Macrocosmic evolution without actually sitting down and meditating, breathing in a prescribed manner, and assuming certain physical postures, etc. However, Tantric meditation quickens the process of spiritual evolution tenfold and provides a powerful and dynamic impetus for continued development.

    

### The Essential Psycho-Spiritual Dynamics of Tantric Meditation

Meditation is the process of converting objectivity into subjectivity, or, transforming  existential limitations and bondages into the pristine purity of Consciousness.  This is indeed the Tantric definition of yoga:  the union of the microcosmic consciousness with the Macrocosmic Consciousness.  It is the gradual realization of our oneness with the Infinite.  Within the chitta are the samskaras in the form of thoughts, feelings, actions, experiences, and sensations.  The subjective sphere of mind is the Aham and Mahat.  Recall that the Aham is the feeling of active doer-ship or ego- the part of the mind that has a subjective identification with the contents of the objective chitta.  For example, if the chitta has constantly experienced the impressions of life in the United States- the cultural norms and mores, the sense of national and cultural identity, a particular socio-economic class, etc.  The subjective ego identifies itself with these impressions and feels that itself, a subject, is associated with its external experiences.  However, the ego is a midpoint between objectivity and pure subjectivity in that the ego does not in itself constitute the subjective identity.  The Mahat is the component of mind with the pure feeling that "I exist."  It is not qualified by external impressions but simply gives the sense of subjective identity to the Aham.  It is this deep feeling of existential identity that initially inspires the mind to discover what it truly is.  When Mahat is manifest, one realizes that the “I” is not the ego, that there is a inner peace and purity that is not touched by thought or action. The Mahat is an inner, quiescent, and tranquil feeling of existence unperturbed by anything external or Aham-oriented.  When the personality or Aham is aligned with the Mahat one is in an internal, spiritual flow.  The Mahat itself is not the final subjective entity, however.  The mind is "an ever-changing, functional, relative entity."  Mind is impermanent, a creation under the influence of Shakti, as well as an entity destined to merge again with Shiva, thus losing its separate identity.   Shiva itself is the fundamental "I", the Knower of mind.  Recall that  Shiva is a singular entity and is the subjective Witness of the microcosm as well as the Macrocosm.  Mahat is a near-perfect replica that serves as the link to Shiva.  Consciousness is free and unconditioned by Mind, Shakti’s creation.  Therefore, the fundamental identity is not just beyond the microcosmic mind, but beyond the Macrocosmic Mind as well.  The essence of a human being, and any other being for that matter, is so sublime that its subtlety rests beyond any vibration in this great and vast universe.  Sadhana is this process of realizing the Infinite within ones own finite being. It is the process of discovering that there is an inner greatness and nobility to the human being in that our relative, created being is the progeny of the Infinite while our transcendental essence is the Infinite itself.
	
Shakti is a spectrum of energetic wave-lengths.  This expressed energy is divided into 3 categories.  The finest wave-lengths are subtle qualifications of Shiva.  This is subtle energy.  Dynamic energy is active and in transformation.  Static energy is more inert, stationary and dense.  The Mahat, Aham, and chitta are a continuum in this spectrum of energy as well.  In other words, the Aham is a refinement of chitta and Mahat a refinement of Aham.  Mind evolves from the external to the internal kosas, from the objective to the subjective.  Conceptual forms in the chitta are dominated by the static force of Shakti, the intelligence of the Aham by the mutative force, and the intuition of the Mahat by the subtle.  Spiritual practice is the conversion of the static concepts of the lower mind into the dynamic intelligence of the Aham and further converting this intelligence into a purer, intuitive form of cognition in the Mahat.  Corresponding with this subtle refinement of cognition is a transformation of the affective qualities.  The egocentric, self-preservation qualities are enlightened by expansive, soulful qualities that lead the heart toward its liberation from all narrow sentiments.  The practice of sadhana must begin, therefore, with the shift of cognitive and affective focus to the higher, newly awakened or dormant faculties of one’s being.
	
With the initiation into Tantric meditation, the practitioner is directed by a process that enables them to direct their mental concentration in the higher centers (vortexes) of mind.  Accompanied by this focus of the mind on a specific vortex, the initiate is given a certain mantra with instructions on how to repeat it internally and how to think or ideate on this sound.    The mantra is a composition of causal sounds emanating from the Macrocosmic Mind.   By repeating the mantra during meditation the mind is heightened above the phenomenal and personal levels of consciousness (the lower kosas) and begins to resonate with the kosas closer to the Macrocosmic Mind.   Also it carries a certain ideational quality that signifies that the microcosm is thinking of its essence; for example, "I am Brahma, or I am That."   Ideational refers to the mindful practice of maintaining a spiritual idea constantly in mind.  The repetition of the mantra with its transformative idea and causal vibration vibrates the objective chitta portion of mind, thus transforming and refining its essence.  Instead of vibrating the chitta with the body and the senses with the enjoyment of the external world, the chitta is internally focused on an infinitesimal point during meditation.  Here one ideates on Shiva with a mantra.  Recall once more that the only difference between the micro and Macrocosmic minds is the objective chitta.  If the mind’s concentration is freed from externalities, one feels identical to Shiva within.  Sadhana is when the microcosm attempts to make its personal ideation vibrate in harmony with the I-Witness.   One tries to remember the I-Witness always in the present moment, the “eternal now.”  The repetition of mantra facilitates this process by pulverizing the gross objects in the chitta (baser samskaras and vrttis) with a higher vibrational frequency.  Instead of thinking “I am useless” or “I am confused” or “I am so great,” as in mundane mental activity, the sadhaka ideates on Shiva with optimism and clarity with the ideation of “I am That,” “I am the Witness,” and begins to feel that the I-Witness is always present and guiding its dear microcosm toward ananda, eternal bliss.
	
A mantra is not an arbitrary collection of sounds, nor does it just signify a hopeful idea without a spiritually scientific purpose.  It is a causal sound tailored to the mental vibration of the initiate.  There are therefore different mantras for different mental vibrations with their accompanying differences in personality traits, emotional and cognitive tendencies, etc.  The teacher must therefore be able to feel the mind of the initiate to determine what mantra is appropriate for him/her or follow strictly a system given by a great preceptor.  There are many public or popular mantras that are commonly chanted or meditated upon by many.  These may elevate the mind to some extent, but a mantra learned from a qualified teacher has a vibrational quality specifically related and tailored to the mental qualities of the aspirant, and therefore has more of a profound effect on the transformation of mind.
	
An old Indian maxim states that "Brahma alone is the Guru."  A qualified teacher must therefore have traversed the relative microcosmic planes of being and have united his/her mind with Brahma.  Only in this state of union is the knowledge and ability to teach meditation properly acquired.
	
Tantric meditation is the vigorous conversion of physical energy into psychic energy and psychic energy further into spiritual cognition.  In this process the objective chitta is pulverized into progressively finer expressions, enabling more Aham and Mahat, or intellect and intuition, respectively, to express themselves.  In this process, the lower vrttis and mental functioning on their respective cognitive planes (kosas) are converted into higher modes of expressions.  Recall the 3 laws of psycho-spiritual development outlined in the Anahata chapter:  recapitulation, transformation and integration.  There are higher modes of expression have their roots in more basic vrttis.  Before love there was blind attachment, before conscious expansion there was ambition.  Before existential preoccupation was primal fear.  All that is needed is the transformation of energy through spiritual ideation to manifest and integrate the higher faculties into the personality.  By continually vibrating the chitta with spiritual ideations via sadhana, the psychic energy is consciously redirected into higher recapitulations.   The lower mind is  thus gradually transformed into the higher recapitulated expressions of the higher vrttis. These subtler expressions can be integrated into one's spiritual being much more harmoniously than the lower vrttis.  Here we see how a sadhaka must have the vibrational and ideational force to garner these lower propensities with ideational insight.  The mind and all of its vrttis must be traversed through sadhana.
               
The process of vibrating the chitta and infusing it with subtler vibrations that transmute lower vrttis into higher ones is brought about by very specific concentration techniques.  As mentioned earlier, the initiate is instructed as to how to withdraw the mind from the senses and physical body  and concentrate it at one of the higher vortexes.  The fact that the mind is concentrated at a higher vortexes causes the prana or psychic energy to flow upward, thus ascending from its habitual haunts in the lower vortexes.  This process alone causes a shift in the way the mental energy flows and thereby fosters the unfolding of higher vrttis in that the mental energy is now moving where it previously wasn't.  In addition the initiate is repeating the pulsative rhythm of the causal sound of a mantra with every breath.  Recall that the root of all of the vrttis is sound vibration.  A mantra has the capacity to harmonize with and transmute the collective sonar vibration of the mind and its vrttis.  The mantra is like a conductor who understands the qualities of each instrument (vrtti) in an orchestra (the mind) and knows how to guide it into harmony. 	Mantra literally means that which liberates the mind.  The mantra carries a spiritual force that helps the mind focus on the essence of one's I-feeling.  A mantra occupies the chitta and helps to keep it one-pointed and steady like a candle flame.  When the chitta becomes like a small point, then it takes on no more forms nor impressions from the Sensory Mind.  The mind is then free to explore internal, mental space of pure Consciousness. The spiritual ideation of the mantra always serves as a reference to the true Witness behind all mental phenomena.  Vibrating the objective mind with the internal repetition of the mantra instills an ideation in which the becomes so light and pure.  In this lightness one feels the awareness of the Infinite One gazing upon the mind who repeats the ideation “I am That.”  This is the perfection of mantra.  The vibrations of the objective mind are entrained with the thought of the Supreme Subjectivity.  The signifier, the mantra, corresponds ideationally with the signified, the Supreme Subjectivity.
	
The level of ideational frequency in the mantra corresponds with the minds essential intuitive abilities at the vortex where one is concentrating or meditating.  For example, to truly meditate on  Shiva the mind must be concentrated above the Anahata Vortex.  The following diagram gives an example of an initiate whose mind is bound by complexes in the Manipura Vortex.  All of the arrows point outwardly.  His mental energy is dissipated through the vrttis.  He has shame, slander, sadism, hatred, and fear as predominant tendencies in the Manipura, as well as anxiety, vanity, selfishness, and duplicity in the Anahata.  These tendencies are signified by the arrows.  The arrows are the flow of psychic energy being dissipated in the expression of these lower vrttis.  The second diagram signifies the change in flow of prana via the vrttis while the mind is meditating or after having undergone a transformation due to the meditation.  Of course, the practice is to bring about an overall evolutionary change in the mind structure and not just a temporary change while one is meditating.  Note how the arrows flowing outward in the first diagram are now flowing inward in the second.  The concentration in the Ajina Vortex has shifted the expression of vrttis from lower to higher expressions.   Also, this heightened energy has found new, positive outlets in the form of hope, expansion of mind, and conscience in the Anahata, putting an idea into practice and devotion at the Vishuddha, and the cultivation of spiritual knowledge at the Ajina.  This growth process indeed occurs in healthy minds without meditation as it is the essential dharma of human beings.  However, the conscious redirection of energy through sincere and dedicated spiritual practice expedites this evolutionary process.  A spiritual practitioner must therefore be strong, vigorous and fearless in order to mentally digest these changes.
	
The desire for psychic and spiritual liberation can only come about once the mind has reached the Anahata level of thought feeling, and activity.  Here one has an intimation that there is a higher spiritual order in the universe even though one may still be bound to the lower realms and their expressions.  The beginning aspirant must therefore have tremendous determination to surmount the binding influences of the lower vrttis.  Along with this determination must be the cultivation of mental vigor and discipline in order to have the awareness and vitality to convert lower psychic expressions into more refined ones.  In Tantra this stage is termed the Warrior stage of sadhana.  Warrior signifies energy and the need to cultivate it willfully.  In this stage it is necessary to meditate regularly, study philosophy, engage in positive activity or service, and learn from those who are more spiritually advanced.  All  energy must be channelized into following the inspiration and guidance of the  conscience.  This takes tremendous effort as one is not yet fully established in their overall concentration on the spiritual ideal.  In order to surmount the duplicity between the desires and conditioning of the lower ego and the intuitions of the conscience, all  efforts must go into bringing about this congruence between the subjective ideal and the objectively real.  Or in other words, the thought feeling and action must become in accord with dharmic conscience.   Before this stage all of one's struggles were based on securing the phenomenal identity of the ego.  One sought to establish oneself according to or against some sort of outer, social reality.  The mind was sharply split into a duality between self and other, between self and world, between impulse and conscience, and between conditioning and self-cultivation.  Because all of the psychic energy is in the ego, the "doer-I", it is necessary for  spiritual practice at this stage to be rooted in the ego.  Instead of the ego being a self-encapsulated end in itself, it is at this stage attempting to align itself with the Mahat, the inner conscience.  Still, it is the medium of action but it is moving toward that which can guide and control it.  In other words, the Warrior stage of sadhana is the attempt for the objective dominated ego to transform the crude chitta in order to align itself with the subjective conscience of the Mahat. The second  diagram shows how the expression of the lower vrttis change with sadhana.

There are many sub-stages in spiritual development.  Spiritual life follows a Hegelian of dialectic in that the developing mind is always changing in response to new realities and their corresponding conflicts.  Nothing in this relative world is permanent.  Perhaps what we hold as a great truth today may become something very commonplace or even false tomorrow.  Greater realizations lead to more subtle conflicts that continually propel one to find continually more subtle resolutions.  An aspirant must accept this continuous cycle of clash and cohesion until one understands the impermanence of the mind.  What we find as true at one stage may undergo changes later. A truth may evolve and undergo changes, thus requiring us to once again modify our concepts.   
	
However, there comes a stage in spiritual life when one becomes established in one's conscience.  Here the dualities between inner and outer, and impulse and conscience are more resolved.  One has acquired the strength, stamina and wisdom to continually follow one's inner ideal.  Previously, in the Warrior stage, the conception of the Supreme Conscious was by necessity dualistic; god was seen as an outside force that controls and guides a universe that I am separated from.  One worships heroes like Krishna or Moses.  In the second, Devotional stage, one becomes so completely ensconced in the Mahat that the life of the dualistic ego has been incorporated into the creative forces of the universe.  One gradually becomes very close to the Macrocosmic Mind of Brahma and willful effort loses its necessity. One begins to flow with dharma, the moral order of the universe.  
	
Human life reaches its apex at this stage.  All of the evolutionary forces propelling one along the evolutionary path have flourished into a united life with Spirit.  Virtue, justice, wisdom and goodness pour forth naturally and effortlessly from ones being.  It is not the case that the personal relative identity is entirely dissolved, but rather that the microcosmic ego exists in harmony with the Macrocosm.  The personality is an extension, a vehicle and mechanism for Brahma.  In other words, Mahat is the faculty that guides the mind while Aham and chitta are the passive recipients to its inspiration.  What need of there is effort at this stage?  Does one still have to cling to the battered boat that took one across the turbulent sea of samskara?  Brahma is one's very own and dear essence while the life of the seeking ego has become a distant memory.  One has arrived at the destination.  All one desires is to be in union with Brahma.  As the Upanishad exclaims, "one must become altogether lost in Brahma, as an arrow in its target."
	
There is still the existence of the microcosm in the Warrior stage.  The chitta, Aham and Mahat of the microcosm resonate with and are harmonized with the chitta, Aham, and Mahat of the Macrocosmic Mind.  This is the stage of liberation, or Mukti.  It is the stage of the savikalpa samadhis, where the microcosmic mind may suspend its separateness in the Macrocosmic Mind for a determined period of time.  The mind at this stage may still hold its personal samskaras or be bound to subtle Macrocosmic samskaras (the propensities of the Vishuddha  and Ajina Vortexs).  It is these samskaras that determine the duration of the union with Brahma in samadhi.  The rise of vibrations in the chitta due to these subtle samskaras perpetuate the existence of the microcosm.  Recall the descriptions of the Vishuddha, Ajina, and Sahasrara Vortexs in chapter 2.  In these stages of evolution the microcosm is closely bound to the macrocosm.  If such a being chooses, they may continue to exist in order to help other beings find liberation.  This determination creates a samskara for them so that their mind may continue to have a momentum of continued existence in harmony with the Macrocosmic Mind.
	
However, recall that at the Sahasrara it is possible for the mind to entirely dissolve in Shiva.  Instead of the chitta, Aham and Mahat resonating with the Macrocosm, they become entirely dissolved in the essential being of Shiva in the Shaeva stage.  This is the stage of nirvikalpa samadhi, the samadhi of indeterminate absorption in Shiva.  When nirvikalpa samadhi is of a permanent nature, it is termed emancipation, or Moksha.
	
The dissolution of mind corresponds exactly with the waning of the binding influence of Shakti over Shiva.  Shakti’s  sentient, mutative, and static forces upheld the existences of the Mahat, Aham, and chitta, respectively.  Now that mind is entirely dissolved in Consciousness, the activity of Shakti can no longer bind that particular mind, for there is no longer the existence of mind.  The universe and creation no longer exist for that emancipated mind; there is only the oneness of the infinite and eternal Brahma.
	
In order to complete the cycle of creation, one must see the absolute oneness of Brahma, that even this physical creation is a manifestation of Spirit. Without this understanding we have not fulfilled our purpose in this creation. Has the Macrocosm created all of this only to show its essential nothingness, without purpose or reason? The illusionist, the spiritual nihilist, closes his eyes all through the day only waiting for the sleep of night. It is the same with all that resist Oneness. They seek an escape from how things really are and deny the essential spirituality of creation and fail to see that our being in this world is to give a name to the nameless, an expression of the inexpressible. As long as one resists the spiritual nature of creation there is no release from it. As Vivekananda once stated, we must leave our mark on this world before we go. True, all is intransient, vaporous, and incessantly passing away from us. But within this hazy mist is a definite theme and purpose for its every particle.
Mukti, or liberation of the mind, is when the memories of one's existence are no longer exclusively related to the experiences of the present body. The notion of life begins to extend into the life of the universe. The spiritually-oriented mind goes beyond the personal memories, the memories of ones lineage and culture, and begins to live within the memories of the human race. Slowly humanity is understood as the personal life is more deeply understood. All memories of your incarnation begin to merge into the eternal presence. What happened 30 years ago may begin to seem like it was yesterday. A memory of my childhood home makes me open my eyes from meditation to see if I really am there. Not having an absolute definition of yourself is no longer a problem. Who is really living this life anyway? There is but one life and it is a good life. The more we merge our separateness in understanding and compassion, the more happy, the more liberated we are.
	
For this reason the knowers of the I-Witness live with an ever-new understanding of their place in the universe and can offer some real good to humanity through their variegated examples. Liberation is a long process that begins even before the awakening of the kundalini. The Infinite has always been calling is back to the cosmic nucleus of Hunab Ku; ever since we were amoebas. A human becomes conscious of this never-ending process of the liberation of the mind from the finite world with the awakening of the kundalini. This awakening and invigoration of the psycho-biological centers in the spinal column induce a recapitulation of Macrocosmic, planetary evolution within one's personal being. One begins to merge one's personal samskaras or memories with the Macrocosmic mind that sustains the Gia, our Earth Mother. One goes deeper into the life of the planet, into the life of the universe.  The effort to liberate the mind via kundalini only ends when a life, a microcosmic evolution, is completely full and ripe. All things are made good within. Only when one has lived fully according to their conscience and has expressed a deep, spiritual intention toward life is one capable of attaining Moksha Here, even these good memories of this microcosmic existence are wiped clean for ever as the mind itself has disintegrated in the supreme Shiva. If one desires this absolute union with the godhead, then one should only live the best life possible, a life full truth and union with the Supreme Consciousness and the expressed universe. The fundamental purpose of life always leads one first to liberation and later emancipation.
	
Microcosms are liberated one at a time.  Because of this, the universe is eternal.  The cycle of creation, Brahma Chakra, is continuous.  Creation is pouring forth from the cosmic nucleus while at the same time creation is returning into union with the cosmic nucleus.  While there are beings evolving toward emancipation, there is at the same time the generation of eternally new creation as the eternally active Shakti transforms the infinite Shiva.  Due to this, creation is endless and eternal.  Brahma Chakra, the Wheel of Creation, only comes to an end with the microcosm, never for the Macrocosm.  Fragments of the Macrocosm (microcosms) are liberated, but never the Macrocosm as a whole.  The Macrocosmic Mind has endless samskaras and is eternally Generator, Operator, and Destroyer.    
	
In  Brahma, the godhead,  is the eternal emancipation, or Moksha.  In this stage the kundaliini, which is the manifestation of Shakti within the microcosm, has been elevated to the Sahasrara, the abode of Shiva.  Shakti again takes its place beside Shiva in the state of eternal and infinite equipoise.  Birth, death, creation and evolution are non-existent and illusory for the emancipated.  There exists only pure Consciousness without an object.  Shiva is aware only of itself, absorbed eternally in its blissful essence.


 
Glossary

Aham:  Subjective identity or ego, the active, “doer-I”.  Self-concept.
Ajina:  Sixth vortex, “command” center of the mind.
Anahata:  Fourth Chakra, literally “not holding or binding.”
Anandamurti:  Philosopher and spiritual teacher who lived from 1921 to 1990.
Artha:  Fulfillment of mental desire, that which gives relief or meaning to the mind's 	inquiries.  Psychological meaning.
Bodhisattva:  A being liberated from personal bondage of samskaras.  They may take 	rebirth only to help others.
Bhakti:  Devotional path to liberation.
Brahma:  The Supreme Consciousness.  The absolute union of Shiva and Shakti.
Cetanasphota: Disolution of the mind in pure Consciousness.
Chakra: “Wheel” or “Circle”   Refers to the bio-psychological mental centers located 	along the spinal column.
Chitta:  Objective chamber of mind that transmits sensory from the brain into the 	mind.
Deva:  Emanation from the Supreme Consciousness, a “god” that controls vibrational 	expressions.
Dharma:  Psycho-spiritual longing.  Moral order and underlying purpose in life.
Ekagrata:  One-pointed concentration on Brahma.
Godhead: “A pure and limpid unity” behind eternal activity of god, the Generator, 	Operator, and Destroyer.  The state of union where Shakti doesn't qualify 	Shiva.
Guna:   Binding quality of Shakti.
Hunab Ku:  Mayan cosmological nucleus.  Purusottama in Indian Tantra.
Ideation:  The ideative practice of maintaining a spiritual idea constantly in mind.  A 	mantra, for example is charged with spiritual “ideation.”
Jagat:  That which is in constant movement; the universe.
Jnana: Spiritual knowledge, the yogic path to knowledge via mental discernment 	between  relative and absolute being.
Kama:  Physical desire.
Karma:  Action, the path of liberated mental activity.
Kosa:  Microcosmic levels of mind.
Kulkulkan:  Mayan concept of Kundalini.
Kundaliini:  “Coiled Serpent Power.”  The divine energy of Shakti dormant in the first 	vortex.
Loka:  Macrocosmic plane of existence.
Mahat:  The most inner, subjective part of the mind that has only the quality of “I 	exist,” the essential “I-feeling.”
Manasphota:  Explosion of objective mental structures into subjective structures.
Manipura:  Third vortex.  “The place of jewels”.
Mantra:  Causal sounds that help vibrate the mind inwardly.
Microvitum/Microvita:  Mental entities without physical bodies that influence mind 	and matter.
Moksha: Complete emancipation of the mind.  Mind merges into Shiva-Shakti 	godhead.
Muladhara:  First vortex, “root” or “base” vortex.
Maya: Relative truth of creation, the cosmic trick that makes us see many instead of 	the One.
Nirguna Brahma: Consciousness without attributes where Shakti doesn't influence Shiva.  Godhead
Nirvikalpa samadhi:  Samadhi of absolute union where kundalini rises to the seventh 	or “crown” vortex.
Objective Chamber of Mind: Chitta or the mental plasm that takes on impressions 	from the senses.  
Prana:  Vital energy that functions between mind and body.
Shakti:  The energy of Brahma.  The Great Mother.
Shiva:  Consciousness of Brahma.  The First Father.
Rajaguna:  Mutative, dynamic energy.
Sadhana:  Spiritual practice.
Sadhaka:  Spiritual practitioner.
Saguna Brahma:  Consciousness with attributes.  “God” as Generator, Operator, 	Destroyer.
Sahasrara:  Seventh Chakra.  “The thousand-petaled lotus.”
Samadhi:  The suspension of the microcosmic mind into Shiva Consciousness. 	Spiritual trance of divine union.
Samskara:  Reactions to original actions that are embedded as seeds within the mind 	that seek to create new actions.
Sattvaguna:  Subtle energy that makes the mind still and calm.
Savikalpa samadhi:  “trance of determinate absorption.”  Union with Brahma through     	spiritual trance of a temporary nature.
Shushumna: Subtle energy channel and path for the kundalini located in the center 	of the spinal column.
Subjective Chamber of Mind: Inner, subjective portion of mind that has the notion of 	“I am” and “I exist.”
Svadhistana: Second vortex.  Place for “Self-establishment” of the personality.
Tamaguna:  Static, entropic energy that pulls the mind toward matter.
Tantra:  The path of expansion from dullness, or spiritual ignorance.
Upanishad:  Classic Indian spiritual treatises about the Vedas.
Vaesnava:  The stage of sadhana where one starts to feel oneness with Brahma.
Vishuddha:  Fifth vortex.  “Especially pure.”
Vrtti:  Vortexes or propensities of the mind.
Yoga:  Union of the microcosmic mind with Brahma.





