---
title: A Name to the Nameless partII ch.2 "The Svadhistana Vortex" 
tags: [A Name to the Nameless]
comments: true
layout: post
--- 

{% capture images %}
	/images/name.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
Within the human genome is a record of all previous forms of life; from human to hominid to Gila monster.  All of ancestral life is within our little microcosmic existence, and recorded in our DNA. After so many life experiences as microbes, plant, reptile, and mammal the microcosmic mind eventually becomes conscious of itself.  Just as there is now a more developed cerebral cortex built upon the reptilian and mid-brains, the Aham-intelligence begins to evolve and replace the blind instincts of the Sensory Mind and chitta.   There are now thoughts and feelings and other qualities of internal, subjective mental awareness that begin to influence the biological organism.  Human consciousness is clearly, sensibly conscious and self-reflective as the subjective chamber of mind begins to have influence over the objective chamber.
The human being occupies a unique though quite odd place in the spectrum of microcosmic evolution.  Plotinus said that humans exist somewhere between the level of the gods and the beasts.  No longer is the modern human being existing in an unconscious Eden, devoid of self consciousness, driven only by instinct, and completely fused with Nature, Shakti's creation.  Nor are we completely unified in the transcendental Shiva Consciousness, utilizing the full extent of our intellectual-intuitive capacity and liberated from instinct and blind attachments.  Rather, we are an odd admixture and alloy of animal and god, of instinct and reason.  Our evolution is incomplete;  our spiritual resplendence is only beginning to dawn from unconscious obscurity.

The emerging ego with its Conceptual Mind is now separated from its unconscious, instinctual fusion with nature.  The Aham with its self awareness and existential needs is more abstracted from the simple here and now of animal life.   However, most  lack the intuition to see beyond the Aham-intellectual boundaries and into an ever greater, conscious union with the Macrocosm.  The evolution and healing of our separateness is a progression and expansion of the separate Aham toward greater, harmonious union with the created universe.  Our liberation requires that we properly cultivate the development of universal love that penetrates all of nature and human society and unites us with others in a spiritual sense.  For a human being there certainly is no real freedom in unlimited sensory revelry.  The purpose and plan of the evolution of human consciousness of not to regress back into unconscious impulsivity nor is it to defensively sustain itself in its present status. Life is an evolutionary movement and flow.  Spiritual and psychological evolution is the process of developing Self awareness and confidence in oneself while harmoniously existing with others.

The Sanskrit word for the human being is manusa or 'mind preponderant being.'  The Svadhistana Vortex vrttis protect the most basic and fundamental security of a mind-preponderant being and are intended to serve and protect the continued evolution of human awareness.  It is easy to see them as refinements of the self-defense and preservation mechanisms of those found in primates and other animals.   A human mind has more a complex notion of self and our  fundamental self preservation drives and defenses are not simply sex, fear and aggression.  Our instinctive defenses bear the stamp of human complexity and Self awareness on top of the purely animal instincts.   They protect the emerging ego from the dangers that threaten its psychological integrity and thereby keep the mind from sinking back into a stage devoid of higher self-consciousness where there is only confused, unbridled instinct.  Svadhistana, in accord with its function, literally means "self-establishment."  It is the self-establishment of the mind with a notion of Self awareness, or Mahat, the subjective 'I'.  However the Aham is still heavily bound by the instinctively oriented chitta for there to be really deep, clear understanding of the inner “I”.  The study of the propensities of the Svadhistana Vortex help the sadhaka to understand the essential desires of the Svadhistana.  A focused intellect can grasp insights into the nature of hidden propensities with a little help from this practical, psychological study of these propensities.  By knowing what they are and what they exist for, we can understand our personal complexes in the light of a broader understanding of human nature.
The Svadhistana Vortex expresses the Conceptual Mind and is a vehicle for this mind to express its particular intelligence within the emerging personality.   No longer is the mind solely guided by fixed physiological instincts in the chitta.  The Svadhistana, “self-establishing” mind is thrown out of an instinctual Eden and is forced to face duality and make choices in a more conscious, conceptual human world.  In this duality one is all too acutely aware of separation and there is so much ignorance and self-doubt hampering the harmonious development of the Svadhistana, “self-establishing” mind.  The Macrocosmic Mind must guide this process of self-establishment that is besieged by so much external clash and confusion.  The Conceptual Mind has received a spark of Shiva’s self awareness, intellect, and humane love to help us in this journey.  The Conceptual Mind can think and plan as well as feel and love because it is Self aware and intelligent.  There is still duality between self and other, between outside and inside, but there are also the tools to resolve these natural limitations.  This separation from the world “out there”  permits the intellect to accumulate knowledge and experience more complex social and inter-personal relationships.  If human development is harmonious and balanced, our reason and human feeling increase and there is a greater feeling of unity with the universe, the Macrocosmic Mind of Brahma.

This ability for the mind to abstract itself from the senses and body by thinking, planning and willing also gives rise to an abstract concept of self, or personality.  The mind now has personal, conscious qualities.  We are now beings with the needs of a person; security, love, belonging, and purpose.  This concept of self is newly-emerging, and the Svadhistana Vortex needs to secure a grounding and  base.  Just as animal and mundane, human life need security from physical dangers to continue to exist, the Conceptual Mind of the Svadhistana Vortex needs psychological security and proper intellectual and social development.  The sole function of the Svadhistana is to secure this psychological base for the emerging ego.  Having this rational base with psychological, emotional security ensures that this delicate and emerging awareness will be able to experience more avenues of intellectual, cultural, and interpersonal, emotional development.
All of the intelligence of the Conceptual Mind is utilized for this purpose.  When there are the appropriate conditions for this level of mind to function completely without hindrance, then the mind can continue to manifest its higher potentials.  A mind that has these fundamental security needs met will indeed have the fundamental self confidence necessary for the ego to proceed with its growth.  The vrttis from the 3rd and 4th vortexes imprint themselves upon the establishing Svadhistana personality and guide it toward wholeness.  A person with a  balanced Svadhistana Vortex will feel secure in the world and believe that there is goodness in it as well as within.  There will be confidence and ability as well as rationality.  The practical and rational, emotionally balanced Svadhistana keeps one mentally balanced without irrational, harmful emotions and projections.  It is only  when the mind lacks these fundamental qualities, that he Svadhistana Vortex has to use its hard-wired defense mechanisms to compensate for an emotional insecurity mental confusion in one’s being. These defense mechanisms are the 6 vrttis of the Svadhistana Vortex.

While the Conceptual Mind does involve the process of conscious, intended reasoning, the majority of its activity is still very unconscious and instinctual.  The mind at the Svadhistana level of evolution is only beginning to express human self awareness.  There are the resources of the Conceptual Mind available but very little self awareness to actually utilize them.  A strong mind will be less influenced by these propensities because of its self-confidence and mental strength, while a weaker mind will be affected by them.  The propensities of the Svadhistana may pirate the Conceptual Mind and force it to work under the control of these instincts.  It is only when the mind has understood the effect of these impulsive, blind vrttis that the cognitive abilities of the Conceptual Mind can be fully utilized instead of being controlled by the vrttis.  The fewer the compensatory vrttis, the more complete is the access to the mental level.  Recall how the vrttis are whirlpools that force distortion on the mind field.  It is like trying to see the vast beautiful landscape with a tornado approaching.  This model is true for all of the vortexes and levels of mind.   At any given level, mind has the full ability to access the entirety of its higher cognitive resources only when there is less distortion from its vrttis.  The expression of a vrtti is an emotive instinct that helps the  mind to relate to its respective level of reality when its cognitive resources are not sufficient.  Therefore, the activation of the vrttis in the Svadhistana Vortex, the seat of the rational mind and the personality's foundation, weaken the minds rational faculties by vibrating with “irrational” thought patterns from these compensatory vrttis.  Each vrtti has its “reason” in that there is a very clear and definite compensatory, self-protective purpose.  Because these vrttis respond to situations of fear and insecurity that have threatened one’s harmonious self-establishment, they blindly react to these situations with an instinctual “irrationality.”

<strong>The 6 Svadhistana Vortexes</strong>

<strong>1. Indifference</strong>

The first vrtti of the 2nd vortex is indifference. A mind that is struggling to develop its personality foundation will certainly encounter situations that threaten its emotional stability and security. When some type of event threatens balance and stability the mind may simply act indifferent to the effect the situation actually has. An indifferent person may suffer greatly or be extremely affected by physical or psychological abuse, an insult, social neglect, etc., and show no apparent concern for the distress that they should be experiencing. Indifference, when it is expressed toward oneself, may take the form of repression. The thoughts, feelings and memories that cause one pain or discomfort are simply censored out by the ego. Instead of being overwhelmed by the negative impressions of suffering in the world, in the family, or inside the person, the mind finds a way to feel indifferent to these damaging impressions.
Take the case of a person who has been mistreated or neglected and has thereby lost trust and the ability to form close relations with others. Perhaps this person wants to love and be loved, but has always encountered pain instead. This is indeed a great trauma for the personality who needs love and trust in order to grow and expand and have the confidence to be able to give love. To compensate for this great loss a person may turn callous and lack regard for others.  Attention isn’t truly given to others because of this complex.  Being fixated on one’s own needs, one doesn’t see the needs of others and perhaps even imposes upon them with their own blind needs.

This tendency is not something that is consciously thought out and decided, like not choosing to listen to the annoying complaints of a neighbor, for instance. This vrtti is a mechanism that is more hard-wired into the mind to keep a threatening situation from distorting, confusing, or even consuming the personality. As the Svadhistana Vortex upholds the basic, fundamental structure of the emerging personality, one can understand how the propensities preserve such a delicate and tenuous structure. The vrtti of indifference isn't simply a conscious suppression of undesirable perceptions, but a very deep and instinctive defense against anything that threatens the structural integrity of the personality.
It should be clear that this propensity does not only function in relation to the other defensive propensities of the second vortex. One can very clearly see this tendency functioning in people with developed and complex personalities. In fact, the more complex the personality becomes the more sensitive it is to more subtle, psychological disruptions. In this light we can see how this vrtti is responsible for the phenomenon of psychological repression. Certainly a way of denying the effect of a disturbing situation or internal thought that doesn’t coincide with the self-concept is simply to deny its effect by repressing it.  With repression there is a system of compensations set up to focus the mind in another direction to repress the pain, suffering, or undesirable thoughts and impulses.   The complex will always try to project itself somewhere else.  The range of this repression varies according to the intensity of the trauma. On the lighter level of intensity one may be repressing a painful experience that affects a certain part of their personality but one is able to repress the pain and still function, although a little neurotic.  At the other extreme would be psychosis, where the tension is so overwhelming that the Baluchistan, self-establishing mind begins to fragment and distort.
The phenomenon of indifference or repression is like a great stone under the surface of a stream. One can't see it, but its effects are visible. Indifference, or any other lower vrtti, take their toll on the mind in that their reactionary nature must force or distort a certain state of mind. Might there come a time when this repressed energy wants to rise to the surface? Might the stream of consciousness move a little deeper and dislodge the great, dense stone? This would require further repression and distortion to keep the repressed reality hidden. However, this tension will somehow manifest in a variety of mental and physical symptoms.

The only way to transform and transmute this vrtti is to be able to see it. However, the ego has built all kinds of structures so that it doesn't have to see what is so painful. In fact, a great part of one's personality is based on a reaction against past sufferings.  One has all kinds of unconscious arguments for not wanting to see.  Opening the black box would require one to substitute their defenses and  false security with a more deeper,  conscious form of security and meaning to substitute for the defense mechanism of repression. One must find the essential needs of the Svadhistana in love, security, belonging, and rational self awareness. The more one finds a sense of grounding in their being with these qualities, the more these repressions are ready to come to the surface of awareness and be assimilated and processed by the higher levels of mind that guide the Conceptual Mind and Svadhistana Vortex. Establishing true meaning and love is antithetical to callous indifference and the walls of egoistic defense gradually begin to break down. The cure for whatever imbalance in the Svadhistana Vortex is in replacing the compensated vrtti for its essential needs.  When the vrttis of the Svadhistana aren’t creating a tornado storm in the mind field, the higher vrttis can impose themselves upon the Svadhistana.  Love, security, and rational insight can instead guide the Conceptual Mind and Svadhistana Vortex so that psychological development isn’t thwarted by the complexes of these defensive vrttis.

<strong>2. Inertia</strong>

Repression or indifference allows the personality to maintain its equilibrium by denying the effects of threatening situations or dangerous inner states of mind. Although the mind may become split by the expression of such a tendency it is still able to maintain its self-concept, though somewhat pathologically. When there is so much suffering, confusion, and fear the mind may repress these debilitating emotions by compartmentalizing it into another part of the personality. The mind can simply deny the painful memories, the taboo thoughts or dark impulses. However, with inertia the ego has become so indifferent and exclusively focused on its conflicts that it simply gets sucked into a negative mental vacuum. The personality is so overwhelmed that it simply shuts down. This type of vacancy is not the same as melancholy, a vrtti of the 3rd vortex, in that with melancholy the person's self concept is affected and dulled by a feeling of depression. Inertia is an even heavier form of depression.  With inertia the entire base of the ego is affected in such a way that the personality switches into a more basic mode where there is not so much self-reflection with painful thoughts and emotions. It is a type of extremely heavy, almost catatonic, depression in which the higher cognitive functioning of the Conceptual Mind is dulled and almost entirely idle. A person may go through life mechanically, eating, sleeping, even working without really thinking or really desiring anything. Life goes on, but in a very dull and depressed manner as the person in this state of crisis unconsciously deems it better to drop into semi-unconsciousness than have to assume the responsibility of awareness and make choices. This is where blind compulsions and paranoia creep into the mind. Without paranoia and compulsion the mind will just continue to fall into a state like catatonic schizophrenia in which one completely “checks out” of reality.  The intelligence of the Conceptual Mind tries to distort and evade the painful state of mind by using other propensities as a defense mechanisms.  When paranoia and compulsion try to awaken one from this existential slumber, we see how "an idle mind is the devil's workshop.” As we will soon see, the Svadhistana Vortex has many other defenses that can function simultaneously.  These complexes will continue to express itself for as long as the mind continues to its world as something very painful and continue respond in another way.

<strong>3. Compulsion</strong>
In the process of “self-establishment” the personality’s self-concept is most strongly defined by its relation to its social environment. This is true whether we are speaking of the evolution of the entire human species through the Svadhistana or the development of an individual from infancy toward maturity. No being is born liberated, one is rather born to experience liberation. At the Svadhistana level of development, the conscious sense of "I am" is not complete in itself but requires external references in order to qualify itself. When the personality is well-adjusted there exists a secure sense of belonging to a family or social group that gives one a healthy reference to one's reality. The ego at this stage is so dependent upon its immediate environment of socialization, be it the clan, the family, or nation. Maintaining this strong and definite attachment solidifies the identity in something greater than itself. When these basic conditions of security and belonging don't exist, the mind must find some way of acquiring them. Compulsion drives the personality to force these basic existential necessities in whatever way necessary. The mind may compulsively attach itself to an external, ready-made social image, or perhaps a rigid an isolated and defensive ego image.  Compulsion also attacks sensory habits or pleasures and exploits them with its desperation.
Compulsion narrows the possibilities of choices in a mind faced with the overwhelming inscrutability of the totality of the human experience. Instead of the insecure and uncertain person having to use one's rationality and self-confidence to adapt and choose a particular mode of being, compulsion narrows those immense possibilities by desperately clinging to one facet of the potentially whole and complete Self. Compulsion is one of the main vrttis that uphold an expanding, though uncertain, ego structure. Viewed at from a higher stage of psychological and spiritual maturity this tendency confines and hampers the flourishing of character by compartmentalizing the personality into a isolated ego image and  some impulses for it to grasp on to. But where would the masses of humanity find security if not for the repetitive and seemingly absolute liturgy of traditions, religion, politics and social convention?  However, it is a great danger when there is such cultural decay and loss of deep meaning in society that there are no longer many effective systems to keep the blind and impulsive masses from falling into compulsive mental patterns, pathological behavior, or dangerous addictions. At the Svadhistana level, the fall of culture is the fall of the person. There is not yet enough strength of character in the Aham-ego to find creative channels of expression to resist social decay.

Again, it is not only that this tendency is active at only the most basic levels of the self-establishing personality.  They can also be very active in more mature personalities as well. This vrtti will often compensate for a weakness in an ego that is only tenuously held together. If the mind can garner all of its strength to focus on a particular image or habit or belief,  then that mind is qualified by that habit, symbol, or mode of being to the degree of energy put into it. Instead of experiencing the pull of entropy and degeneration the mind develops an outward momentum. It is a desperate attempt to hold together the structural solidarity of the self by developing a compulsive attachment to something other than the self. The object of compulsion could be something physical like a substance; an action like a repetitive behavior pattern, or a fixed fanatical and dogmatic idea that one clings to in order to have something to believe in.
Compulsion may overpower all other forces of repression when the mind desperately needs an intense experience to overpower the effects of inertia and depression. What was once an active, intervening conscience that inhibited or channelized blind impulse, may simply be forgotten or argued away. In a crime of passion, for example, the conscience is entirely overridden. With the common compulsive habits the higher, more intelligent level of personality can invent excuses, arguments, projections and distortions so that the desperate, taboo, compulsive expression is somehow permitted to exist side by side with the ego's social image. Duplicity and argumentation, for example, are tendencies of the Anahata Vortex that permit a level of really sophisticated argumentation, repression, and distortion to keep the ego unaware of what is really occurring. Dark, unconscious tendencies continue to express themselves while the most intelligent part of the personality in the Anahata Vortex and intuitive level of mind is used to make excuses and justify. This duality is common in almost all people to some degree as long as there is a rift between who one is on the inside and who one is on the outside. To liberate blind compulsion and its defenders is a huge leap in one's evolution of self awareness. This is often a great inconvenience, even terror, that presents stubborn resistance.  This liberation requires seeing, accepting, and ultimately understanding the complexes that drove the mind toward compulsive habits or addictions.

Compulsion can even hone in on purely sensual tendencies that are in the domain of kama vrtti, physical desire. And because everyone somewhat familiar with the vortexes seems to associate sexuality with the second vortex, what better example could one give other than the sex?  Sexual desire is a tendency of the first vortex within kama vrtii, or physical instinct. This doesn’t mean that sexuality can only express itself on the most basic levels of reproduction and sensory gratification. The basic, instinctual sexuality can be qualified by the higher vortexes. Compulsion is sublimated to a desire for beautiful, attractive forms in the 3rd vortex and to an even higher degree of interpersonal intimacy in the 4th vortex. Compulsive sexuality is a co-mingling of Svadhistana mental complexity with what is fundamentally a sensual and animal desire in the Muladhara, 1st vortex. Compulsive sexuality is not mere animal propagation, but a desperate attempt for the mind to establish a base for oneself through intense contact with one’s own natural, repressed instincts. Compulsion will never be love, nor even romance.  The danger is that other vrttis of the Svadhistana like repression or lack of confidence may express and apparently alleviate themselves through compulsive sexuality. If there are no meaningful and expansive emotive and cognitive outlets for the mind to flow into, it can resort back into the senses for its meaning and psychological foundation. And what closer and more immediate sense of gratification is there than one's own body? Certainly it is not the healthiest equation for one to unconsciously make, but one quite common and even glorified in this society. The danger of this equation, or any other equation that the mind makes to compensate for its insecurity and lack of meaning through whatever form of sensual compulsion, is that the body is designed to accommodate the desires of the Sensory Mind. Sexuality is natural. Enjoying food is natural. But compensating for a lack of meaning in the psychological level by indulging the Sensory Mind is certainly an overload for the body to bear. The mental desires, artha vrtti, must find their compensations in the mental, existential level. To channelize this heightened, more potent mental energy into the senses will always exhaust and sicken the body. By compulsive eating one makes the body toxic and damages the digestive organs and also becomes obese. Through compulsive sexuality one may weaken and damage the liver, kidneys, and the reproductive organs and exhaust one’s vital energy.
I have never taken the so-called “sexual Tantra” seriously. Firstly, because the only people who I have ever known to practice such things were never really balanced. Sure, they spoke of awareness and love and transmutation and all of those nice things, but it was just all too obvious that they were just sex addicts propelled by unconscious emotions. They always left a trail of harm. It may be that there were once some more conscious practices that really didn't trap people into their compulsions, but if they were in fact truthful, then would have to be based on yama and niyama, the ethical base for the practice of yoga. Most sexual relations ultimately lead one to suffering. It is a transgression of ahimsa, or non-violence, to project one's selfish urges onto another. It is no wonder that in the 2 languages that I understand, the crude word for the sexual act can be synonymous with the words cheating, deceiving, or generally harming another.

The only functional sexual Tantra that I have could ever imagine is to be responsible and never try to harm anyone while at the same time make the indefatigable effort to try and understand the propensities of the second vortex. The sexual distortions exploit these fundamental vrttis. The more suffering, separation, and insecurity that there is in the Svadhistana level, the more likely that sexuality will try and compensate for these emotions. However, these necessities are valid and are so profound and fundamental to the personality that they really need to be understood. Perhaps the blind compulsions are rooted in an untimely withdrawal of a mother's breast that left one sucking in nothingness. Or perhaps sexuality has aligned itself with an inner, unconscious resentment and lack of confidence that tries to outwardly seduce and dominate through sexual dominance, games, or manipulation.
The purest and happiest people I have known were celibate yogis.  They speak of how the mindful retention of the seminal fluid permits this energy to be used for meditation and to strengthen the nervous system.  Not many people are emotionally mature enough to practice celibacy without brutal repression and the accompanying psychological back-lash.  However, for those few who have deeply understood life, celibacy may come quite naturally.  Really, one has to have lived and understood desire before being able to “renounce” desires.
When there is no suffering, there is no desire, and where there is no desire, there is no suffering. This is true for all desires, not just sex. Few people can really understand this. Ramakrishna once said that mundane pleasure is like a dog chewing a sharp bone that doesn't realize the “satiation” of this desire comes from its own blood. It is fear and insecurity that keep us bound into the limitation of a separate self, and therefore bound to selfish desires. Sometimes, even very highly developed minds overlook these underlying reverberations in the shadows of the emotions. The pirates to our present state of peace are often something unseen from our past. I have found that the study of the vrttis, especially those of the Svadhistana, are paramount for finding the psychological balance that permits further balanced, intuitive, spiritual development.
<strong>4. Insecurity, Lack of Confidence</strong>

When the Aham lacks the capacity to find a basic sense of emotional security and psychological adjustment within itself and with its environment, the vrtti of lack of confidence expresses itself. This propensity isn't mere existential anxiety because inferiority isn't situational or focused on a certain ability or aspect of the personality. Worry is based on excessive thinking and flighty emotions whereas lack of confidence is a more generalized contraction of the ego and a fundamental lack of faith in one's own abilities. The psychological base for all of one's thoughts are self-defeating and keep one confined to staunch limitations. Perhaps this lack of confidence came about because of habitual failures, because of a suppressive, unloving and impersonal environment, or another internal psychological disturbance that inhibits one's development and expansion. In short, inferiority comes about as a lack of love and attention and so can only be remedied by a true love and attention.

With lack of confidence, a part of oneself is giving up the struggle for personal growth and expansion. Instead of being able to use the ingenuity of the intellect and an emotionally secure personality to be able to find a secure mode of self-definition and personal meaning in one’s world, the mind and personality instead contract into a state of low self-esteem and a negative self-definition.  This contraction of the ego also paradoxically sustains it. If this distrust of one's own powers prevents one from acting and making choices necessary for growth, then it can also protect one from the fear of failure in these attempts. The ego sustains itself by not undertaking any new challenges that it could fail to manifest. Perhaps this failure would be more of a blow to the personality than not doing anything at all. The person squanders what little confidence they have and desperately cling to it.   One is not fully alive and settles to live in fear and doubt rather than confront the demands and challenges of self establishment and self-definition.
This inferiority complex will continue to cripple one's development until one understands the causes of the complex which are always some form of a lack of proper self-regard due to lack of love and attention. The inferior always feel separate and disconnected from others. They do not feel accepted and worthy of the respect and recognition of others, although they desperately need and seek it. A person may have received little emotional security or social orientation in the past. Or he/she may have suffered great deprivations or may have made many errors in life that finally provoked a defeatist complex.
Whole societies can suffer from an inferiority complex. As long as human beings are closed off into ideas of class, race, nationality and religion, the powerful will always impose inferiority complexes on those more vulnerable.   What is required is that one break through the walls of discrimination and disunity with others. We must learn how to trust others as well as form positive social, familial, and intimate relationships. There are few humans that don't have at least some lack of confidence. If not, what would become of you? This tendency only dissolves to the degree that fear and narcissism are transformed into peaceful co-existence and a deep respect for others. Only by gradually transforming one's little fearful ego into union with the great, internal “I-Witness” of Shiva  will the sense of inferiority ultimately be overcome. If the root of the person is infinite peace and eternal joy, how can the One continue negating Oneself?  How can the Self not be in the Other too?

<strong>5. Paranoia</strong>

Inferiority, compulsion and repression have caused the distortion of separation in the ego and continually pervade and sustain the separate self.  Paranoia symptomatically reveals the hidden, impulsive schemes of the fearful, separate ego who in actuality builds castles in the sand.  Influenced by these negative vrttis, one is never entirely secure and happy. There always seems to be something waiting to take it all away.  A great, unnamed terror activates when we see the waves of destruction getting a little closer, or so they appear.

Paranoia is a generalized all-encompassing terror that overwhelms the mind when a specific situation threatens to undermine or uproot the entire Aham structure of the mind.  It is a pervasive sense of terror induced not from a situational fear, but a greater fear or perceived threat that can annihilate and consume the entire identity.  The weaker the integrity and security of the Aham becomes, the more pervasive is the fear that the whole self will be swallowed up.  The person who irrationally fears other people, accidents, wild animals, the CIA, reptilian beings who have invaded the royal blood-lines, or whatever other threat is projecting their own inner insecurity and paranoia on an outside source of “danger.”  Perhaps this person goes through life normally, but projecting their own inner terror and insecurity on some “other.”  A person very weak will be consumed with this fear and with no manner to remedy it.  They become completely dominated with the idea that something is going to destroy them and can think of nothing else than to defend themselves from it.  They will gladly follow the banner of those who promise to assuage their fears.
As we will understand while discussing the higher vortexes, there are various forms of fear that are different in their degree of intensity and the level of mental development at a particular vortex.  Paranoia or fear of annihilation, as stated, conjures the most primordial of fears.  It is something so overpowering that the most basic animal defenses of the Muladhara get expressed and recapitulated in the Svadhistana Vortex.  As long as a mind clings to a suffering, fearful ego identity paranoia will always be present.  This really negative and contracting tendency may pervade the personal and social development of the personality, which only results in more alienation, suffering and fear.

While discussing compulsion it was mentioned that an outward, blind, and compulsive attachment to an habit, addiction, another person, or a rigid idea can keep the personality from disintegration during a time of psychological crisis.  In this case compulsion may create some temporary, forced union with something stronger, or at least stimulating, outside of one’s fragile self.   Self awareness emerges as weak, tenuous, and under constant threat of negation while struggling to maintain the new-found self-conscious and “self-establishing” mind and personality.  As paranoia pervades the development of an alienated, desperate, and compulsive personality, the ego builds itself upon layers of fear, insecurity and defensiveness instead of security and a sense of belonging to a family or society.  These compensations never really make one whole and the result is more separation and more fear, but with greater psychological complexity.   Paranoia seems so excessive and unnecessary.  However, it always accompanies the isolated, fearful ego.    Paranoia is not situational fear.  It not just a specific time or place that provokes intense fear, but one projects this fear into perhaps all situations.  It is a psychological, Svadhistana  “fight or flight” mechanism.  This basic defense mechanism has habituated for the paranoid personality.  Paranoia is always an underlying hell for the imaginary, fictitious, and fear-based ego, but fearful situations are not always imaginary.  The world is a terrible place for many.  Sometimes there are situations that are truly fearful and destructive and one must try to find a solution without falling into fear of annihilation.  Instead of creating a human society based on unity and cooperation, modern society has become a savage, paranoid system that is all too ready to wage terror and destruction.  Terrible experiences can make even a strong and sane person at least a little paranoid.
The more separate from a secure sense of self, the greater the fear. Fears from the past project themselves on to the present.  The more closed we are to other human beings, the more barriers there are to harmony and peaceful co-existence.   It is only when we are able to ultimately understand the clinging and grasping of our fear-based ego that this primal fear is understood.  As long as we attempt to sustain a separate and fear-based notion of self there will always be an underlying instability and fear of psychological annihilation.  More fear and paranoia will never cure this vicious cycle.  The essential needs of the person must be found by finding the appropriate social and interpersonal conditions that permit the higher vrttis to compensate for these unhealthy ones.
<strong>       </strong>
<strong>6. Resentment</strong>

The most basic and essential emotional need for the human mind is love. The person that receives unconditional love from early age receives the psychological framework necessary to have confidence in oneself and in one's world. The more that I recall my earliest memories of childhood, the more I understand that such a loving childhood is recalled in this eternal present by some eternal presence inside me. They are memories of a simple self filled only with happiness and love where separation and suffering had not yet entered. Now, it is only in this eternal Now that I can find anything close to the deep bliss of these memories. In a way I have come nowhere, because it is the same eternal Now as in childhood. In the end, our entire mind will have to dissolve back into ananda, eternal bliss. It is the destiny of all microcosms. I see that life now only toward toward ananda and nowhere else. It always has and always will.

Loving relationships with other human beings is what not only gives us our fundamental emotional security and a secure sense of self in the world, but is really the foundation for all of life. To the degree that we don't have love in our lives, is the degree to which we are separated from others, ourselves, and the great Self. Christ said that we cannot love god which is invisible if we can't love man which is visible. Lack of love is always a wound for it is a negation of our true human purpose. Without it we are fish out of water or a bird without sky. When the personality is deeply wounded by another person or an aspect of their environment (oppressive social structures like poverty, violence and racism), it will most likely express a reaction to this hurtful, emotionally damaging transgression in the form of emotional repressions, lack of confidence and also resentment. With resentment, the intensity of this expression is in proportion to the degree of transgression and wounding of the fundamental security structures of the personality. Resentment is a response in the same manner as the transgression. The wounded and transgressed wants to react to the same degree that they were reacted upon in order to balance out the intense pain inflicted upon them.
Like the other Svadhistana vrttis, this is a fundamental defense mechanism and is a very generalized and pervasive feeling. Some harm has disrupted the security and well-being of the personality.  Because of the degree of harm, the weakened personality summons up an old hard-wired defense structure from the most basic and primordial depths of the mind. This reaction is very deep and unconscious and carries with it a wrathful expression of self-defense and self-preservation from the most primordial levels of one's being. This vrtti, like the others in the Svadhistana, color and qualify the entire psychological outlook. This feeling is so often projected onto other people or other aspects of society and creates a very marked and rigid self against not-self barrier. There is a fundamental level of distrust and suspicion of others. For example, a mild expression of this may be resentment towards all forms of authority because of a deep grudge a child has towards an unloving parent.  Or perhaps one is scolded or bullied at school and has a general distrust and resentment toward society.  A more extreme expression would be sheer rage and an intense, pervasive hatred for anybody who may remotely remind them, consciously or unconsciously, of the original traumatic experience of being violently abused.
Whatever the degree of resentment, it will have to be let go of at some time. Resentment is like cactus spines that keep others always at a distance and stick them when they get close. Emotional healing at the Svadhistana always requires a re-orientation and re-connection to other human beings in a more harmonious and loving way. As long as there is no love, be it brotherly or romantic or spiritual, resentment will remain in defense of the damaged ego. I recall Victor Hugo's Jean Valjean in “Les Miserables.” All he knew was resentment. It was the only power he had toward a hostile world. All he could do was hate. Only through a deeply spiritual transformation of love and complete acceptance by the bishop could he could begin to let go of his resentment and become a new man. This part of the narrative is a very subtle dialogue and a great description of a guru-disciple relationship. The bishop's divine compassion impressed his saintly image onto the criminal mind of Jean Valjean. The power of the bishop's love is a great will that overpowers the defensive and resentful ego of the criminal. It is so overwhelming that it takes birth in his new found soul and begins to replicate this very same image deep into the new person of Jean Valjean. It is an imposed, compassionate pattern that endures and Jean Valjean eventually became as pure and compassionate as the bishop.

After discussing the 6 vrttis of the Svadhistana one can understand the degree to which the second vortex is qualified by the external, social world. The ego is not developed enough emotionally and cognitively and internalized enough to have a confident and centered personality to govern the mind. Instead external factors like family and social environment, socio-historical and economic conditions construct the Svadhistana, self-establishing mind. It is for this reason that the Svadhistana needs environmental security for inner equilibrium. In times such as the present with so many rapid social changes and turmoil that weaken the familiar and collective social identity, it is no surprise that there are so many 2nd vortex imbalances. Even though modern human beings are not entirely governed by the 2nd vortex, there is indeed a definite lack of firm grounding in most peoples personalities that only hinders the unfolding and expression of their higher, humanistic and spiritual vrttis. Developing a balanced social environment that fosters and nourishes individual and collective well-being is fundamental for the present and future evolution of human society. Solutions to this tragic imbalance will become more clear as we discuss the higher potentials of the human mind.
<strong>Yama and Niyama</strong>

How we see the physical world is determined by what level of mind we use to see it. Only in the lower levels of mind is cognitive activity dominated by the senses and cerebral activity. If we purify the Svadhistana, or conceptual level of mind and liberate it from narrow, egoistic thinking, then it is possible to see the world as a projection of thought.  To know this is to change our thoughts and thus change our world. Here is where we realize something very deep about our essence and its connection with a higher, cosmic order that works through our evolving Self awareness, if we allow it to. With the six vrttis of the Svadhistana mind in balance, one can liberate oneself from self-exile and learn to trust that you have a place in the cosmic moral order.

The Svadhistana, Conceptual Mind is capable of abstract thought and therefore the idea of a self naturally arises. It is so important that this “self-establishing” mind be based on love, security, and rationality. Yama and Niyama are simple, yet profound guides for human conduct that foster spiritual awareness and union at all levels awareness and for human, “mind-preponderant,” “self-establishing” beings. The Svadhistana level of mind corresponds to the “liquid factor” of unified energy.  This “liquid” energy is a unified field of waves that collapse and crystallize into the material world, the solid factor.  The liquid factor is more a world of “waves” than a world of “particles.”  Conceptual awareness is greater and we can comprehend our relationship with the natural and social worlds.  This subtle, moral awareness is encompassed within these 10 universal principles. They help keep our external mental projections from reacting, from clashing and bouncing back against the real, living, conscious universe, which is the Macrocosmic Mind of Brahma. To go against the Tao, the cosmic order, will always cause reactions or deformations in the unified field of the liquid factor. The universe always re-adjusts itself from its deformations and we therefore are always experiencing our reactions. “As you think, so you become,”
Tantric yogis realized that in order for a human being to properly develop personally and socially to the degree where they are capable of practicing sadhana, it is necessary to have a moral code of conduct as a friendly guide.  All societies teach norms and customs that ideally should help orient its members toward proper conduct so that there is harmony in that society.  In contemporary society there is less and less wisdom that parents teach their children.  The values people often learn through the media and in society in general teach superficiality, domination, selfishness, and materialism.  Very few people have the notion that they live in a live universe where there really exist certain moral laws of harmony and balance.  So often, those that speak of morality use it as a fearful force to control the behavior of others instead of using moral wisdom to free the mind from distorted ideas.  Religious and ethical systems often give one a “rationale,” a pattern of how to behave.  What they often lack is how to create the conditions to help one realize moral discernment.  Yama and Niyama isn't about being a good sheep that follows all of the rules like a cog in the system.  This world is relative and there are no hard and fast, inviolable laws that apply to every person in every situation.  The universality of Yama and Niyama consists in the openness of these concepts that the spirit of the idea pervades all possible situations.  For example, ahimsa, the first and most important ethical principle of yama, is not absolute non-violence where the moral law says you can't kill a mosquito or accidentally step on a bug.  Instead, ahimsa  is the spirit of not having violent intentions toward any entity.  Ahimsa attitude that one carries into every situation, remembering that Shiva is behind all life.  Perhaps this principle doesn't give you the exact manner to respond to every given situation, but does suggest the spirit of interaction.  If it did tell you exactly what to do, then what would be the value of discernment?    What is important is that one understands violence in all aspects and sincerely tries to never inflict this unconscious destruction upon others.  The basic idea of Yama and Niyama is that all beings are sentient and have an existential  purpose.  All beings need intelligent culture and compassionate nurture.  All of the principles of Yama and Niyama lead to universal love.  All beings are ultimately Shiva, but need a little care and nourishment to realize this.  Yama and Niyama helps inspire this universal sentiment.

The 10 principles of Yama and Niyama are just and very universal spiritual values that are really applicable to all societies in that they are practical values based on dharma, based on our essential nature.  The principles of Yama and Niyama would be the simple, natural goodness of a realized being, a Bodhisattva  They give us a working model of morality, of how a sadhaka, or practitioner of sadhana should behave so as to protect their spirit.  Their understanding helps the individual not just to adapt to society, but to help one understand the deep truth and purpose of morality.  Yama and Niyama aren't so much divine commandments as they are practical guides to conduct.  For the Svadhistana mind to develop properly in a secure social environment and with self confidence, Yama and Niyama are indispensable.  They keep the mind free of complexes generated by ignorant and selfish impulses that make sadhana impossible.  What enforces and inspires morality isn't the threat of punishment so much as the understanding of action and reaction.  Good moral education cultivates the discerning intellect so that the physical desires aren't just repressed but properly understood.   When one sees that suffering and alienation are the result of selfish, unconscious actions, then one truly wants to find a path of activity that purifies and liberates instead of enslaving one to unwholesome desires.  The 5 principles of Yama teach balance in social behavior, while the 5 principles of Niyama orient one toward basic spiritual discipline.  They are as follows:

<strong>Yama:  Social practices</strong>

1. Ahim'sa: Not to inflict pain or hurt on anybody with intention by thought, word or action,

2. Satya: The benevolent use of mind and words with compassionate truthfulness.

3. Asteya: To renounce the desire to acquire the wealth or qualities of others.

4. Brahmacarya: To keep the mind always absorbed in Brahma and see all beings as Brahma’s expression.

5. Aparigraha: Live simply and avoid material excess.

<strong>Niyama:  Personal practices</strong>

1. Shaoca:   Purity of the body, mind, and environment.

2.  Santos'a: Mental equipoise and peace of mind.

3. Tapah: To undergo hardship for the welfare of others through selfless service.
4. Sva'dhya'ya: The study and proper understanding of spiritual scriptures and philosophical books.

5. Iishvara pran'idha'na: To take shelter or meditate on Iishvara, the Supreme Consciousness.

For a more complete and very lucid, modern and socially applicable understanding of Yama and Niyama, I refer the reader to the book of Ananadamurti, “A Guide To Human Conduct.”
