---
title:  Microvita and Tantra Maya ch.9 "Microvita and the Current State of Affairs on Planet Earth"
tags: Microvita
comments: true
layout: post
--- 

{% capture images %}
	/images/microvita.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
The time in which we live today is certainly the most crucial time in the planet's history. There has certainly been great evil and distortion of dharma in the history of this planet. But never has it been so universal; effecting all of the planet and its inhabitants- plants, animals, and humans. Modern materialism has afforded human beings the dominion of nature and the enslavement of humanity. A global material culture has been created that makes it difficult to see the Spirit in things. The majority of human beings are wrapped up in their physical existence. The “privileged” are involved in pursuing their material comforts. The majority, on the other hand, are struggling to eat and obtain basic commodities. Where are the humans that still have a little humanity? Recall the Sanskrit word for human being, manusa- mind-preponderant being. I don't mean to say that the majority of humanity is completely bad, rather that the majority are so distracted and have very little dharmic alternatives for existence. On the other hand, I don't want the term “distracted” to lighten the gravity of the situation. When the mind moves toward matter it degenerates slowly but surely. With the majority of human beings thinking, feeling, and acting mainly in the material world there is a definite trend of degeneration. Instead of the mind moving in the flow of evolution, or pratisaincara. there is a negative evolution, or negative pratisaincara.

<strong>The Zombie Apocalypse</strong>

The zombie apocalypse has already begun Look at the world, in the cities, at all of the suffering and despair. Not many people have a good, sane reference for living. In fact, in places where there is already more despair than hope, then its probable that such places are already lost as possible habitats for sane human beings and nothing can be done to remedy the situation at this point. When honest and sincere people lose good examples in society and culture, it is a great struggle for them to follow a moral path. The truth is that just about everywhere, there are more people falling from rather than rising to more conscious and harmonious ways of living. The psycho-physical entropy of this effect is bringing the most self-destructive microvita that are attacking and degrading our consciousness. These are natural effects that are caused by our great transgression of basic tenets of what it means to be a human being. We have become virulent, and the truth is that there is a part of the cosmic moral order that is simply letting humanity destroy itself. It is seen as a sick organism that must be drastically altered or destroyed. I won't argue with this but will say that there is still something worth saving, something deserving of what it means to be a true human and that the people who still have a little inner light, love and hope should hold together.

Perhaps we can't make the entire world yogis, but we can at least try to teach our neighbors and those receptive to some simple ideas like Yama and Niyama with some chanting of Baba Nam Kevalam. We have seen here at Rancho Misterio how this can help to maintain a community and network of friends even through times of war. If this isn't possible, then we can at least meditate within the sure protection of the spiritual family and create a spiritual wall of defense against the zombie apocalypse.
<strong>Cognitive Dissonance and Collective Insanity</strong>

While I was a student at UT, a group of drunken fraternity boys pushed a piano through a window that fell 10 floors and killed 2 people in the street below. As if there were not a better use for a grand piano! All these bone-heads got together and decided they were not responsible. They collectively blamed the victims. "Why were those stupid people walking the streets at 3 am?" they argued. My professor of social psychology marveled at this phenomenon of "cognitive dissonance." Cognitive dissonance is a mental state that occurs when there is a major contradiction in the structures of the ego. A powerful event that is different and contradicts the projections of its habitual reality creates a state of dissonance and inner tension in the mind. Instead of being only superficial and frivolous boys, they are now guilty of killing innocent people. They thought they were good people, perhaps the best, and now they are seen as criminals. To neutralize this cognitive dissonance, this state of tension induced by a great contradiction and confusion to the ego's reality, one has to invent excuses that serve the confused ego and create an acceptable story so that one can continue thinking in the same way as before so that one's projections about “reality” are not contradicted and interrupted. The psyche must avoid at all costs this painful state of cognitive dissonance. We are all cognitive misers and always look for excuses and pretexts rather than the complex truth. If you can not find an excuse, then you live in torment. In the case of frat boys, they can not bear the social censure and personal guilt and simply pass the blame on some "other". This is, of course, much easier when each individual has the rest of the "team" supporting him.

These superficial socialites with the Greek letters were often conformist nationalistic and patriotic types that become model citizens and good leaders in business and government. Does the irresponsibility of these students reflect the reality of society in general? We live in our isolated world and only care about our selfish well-being, or perhaps only our near and dear ones. How many people are concerned about economic wars and our military-industrial complex that undermine democracy by sabotaging the economies and governments of weaker nations? Who thinks about environmental degradation, economic exploitation of other people on the planet, and widespread degeneration of the human soul trapped in this materialistic, deterministic cage that so much of our world has become?
Most people are just repressed frat boys on the inside. Most have a cold indifference or simply a flagrant ignorance and prefer to watch TV, eat Big Macs, and buy strange things to fill their emptiness. Who will criticize if everyone is living in the same way? It can not be bad if everyone else is part of the scheme, if the national sentiment gives one an opiate to filter anything that creates this cognitive dissonance. Why not go on raising the flag a little higher than one's cognitive dissonance? It enables individuals and society to continue their impunity and irresponsibility. How will the mundane and selfish American mentality ever change and take responsibility for the damage that is being created around the world with such a petty, self-centered bias which serves nothing but the base appetites? Most people who follow this kind of superficial ideology do not care about what happens to people in other places, as long as they continue to live in narcissistic overabundance. Their ideological distortions hide the ugly truth that they have to kill others to steal the natural resources and labor of others. That's why hardly anyone in the US will believe that there is a genocide in Mexico, for example, and that his predatory lifestyle and political ignorance is responsible for so much destruction and suffering for the planet and its people. The first world is the parasite of the third.
Personally, I have received great benefits by being born in the US: a good family, education and a safe environment in which to live. However, when one peers out of the false security bubble of "The Truman Show", develops a natural, spiritual and universal consciousness, one begins to see the terrible things that the politicians, bankers and corporations are doing to the world. So that a few can live in wretched excess, the masses of humanity have to live in misery. And for what end? The modern materialistic society of the United States is so full of mental pathologies that people often end up suffering more than the oppressed and exploited in the third world. Often I see more light in the eyes of the indigenous who live under tin roofs in the mountains than in the people of modern suburbs where I grew up. Though poor and forgotten, at least those people still have a piece of land and have not been overcrowded urban slums to be devoured by capitalist matrix. There are still people who are truly of this earth.
However, this situation is an absurd instability that can not last. At present there is an internal revolution within the intelligence systems of many governments around the world. Whistleblowers are emerging from behind so many nooks and crannies. There is a division between those who would sustain national solidarity against the will of the imperialist multinationals that benefit from this spread and perpetuate the violence that makes us all enemies. We overvalue their knowledge and power. Its existence is based on nothing more than the destruction and distortion of material and social reality. Behind the power that we give them, they are actually insecure and fearful people hiding behind the status-quo. Their only power is that our weaknesses and acceptance of their lies have not given us other solutions than their distortions, exploitation, and wars of annihilation. Whether American, Israeli, Mexican, etc., intelligence officials know that it is a show of blatant lies that cover a brutal reality and that their states are manipulated by bankers and multinational corporations. Intelligence is a two-edged weapon. These people whose profession is a lie and create war and destruction are in a deep part of his psyche actually well aware of the weaknesses in their networks of lies. No matter how sick and distorted their minds have become there is always a live witness that sees through their game of lies. They are not dumb beasts, but degenerate intellectuals. There remains some portion of an inner intelligence that makes them uneasy and restless. To reflect and resound these lies back to them is the duty of all who love liberty and seek a better and more balanced world. Leaders play the game of psychological terror, as well as actual, aggressive terror. Should we not find a more subtle and intelligent way to return this destruction upon them? Should we not rise above their petty little ideologies and feelings with the highest universal humanism and spiritual strength to reflect their hell back upon them? Make the mind a laser that penetrates through this darkness to send this mass of foul lies back to the perpetrators. This refined interior light will protect you personally and help repel their attacks on our collective human society. We must tap our reserve forces in the deepest part of the mind to defend against this degeneration and impunity. Neurosis and psychosis is the natural result of most people who do not renounce the path of lies and destruction. Let them destroy themselves rather than others. The stronger you are, the more their own distortions fall back upon them. There is some good that torments this fragmented state and sick of existence. That is where to attack in silence and secrecy, as they will not be conquered by the "peace and love" entreaties. Their weakness is in the same point as their cognitive dissonance and false consciousness. What does the shrewd capitalist know of the greater forces in the universe, these demons who exploit and kill for finite matter, poor ideology and petty ego? Perhaps some will change, but most eventually be devoured by their own psychopathology because of such internal distortion. They are cunning, but a deeper moral intelligence connects us to true power and knowledge in the universe. They do not know the power of Tao, of dharma, the universal moral order of the universe. A mind without spiritual awareness is like a ship lost at sea, full of holes, and sinks slowly.
The leaders and also their followers also carry the burden of truth through the lie. Those who accept the popular lies also pay the price in the end. Although most are not aware that they are ultimately working towards truth, even through his own degeneration. The materialistic and narcissistic example of existence with all its pathology has given proof to the world of its unsustainability and its inevitable madness. This giant collapsing on itself is teaching many lessons to the world of how not to live.

<strong>Collective Kundalini Awakening</strong>

Anandamurti, in a talk called, “The Coming Ice-Age,” speaks of how the weather patterns on the planet have been changing drastically since the 1980's. He speaks of this phenomenon not as catastrophe but as natural change. He links the changing polarity of planets poles as the underlying cause. He says they will shift soon and with this change there will be changes in electromagnetic fields. Many species will have to undergo biological metamorphosis to survive these changes. Most human beings will become extinct. Only those with refined nervous and glandular systems will be part of the new humanity of the near future. I see this as natural selection in action, although here we are speaking of a natural selection based on consciousness and emotional intelligence instead of brute strength or intellectual cunning and ruthlessness. With very little personal, social, ecological, and spiritual consciousness it will be difficult for the collective mind of humanity to adjust with these changing electromagnetic fields. These human beings will become like the Neanderthals of the past, an extinct species unless there are very fast, radical changes. Anandamurti said that at times evolution makes a sudden “galloping leap.”

I view this phenomenon as a collective kundalini awakening. Kundalini, as the “fundamental negativity,” is the force latent at the base of the spine that brings every string of creation back into the womb of Om, dissolving every flicker of color and cosmic sound in the crown above the corpus collosum between the cerebral hemispheres and above the pineal gland. Kundalini is Shakti, the Cosmic Creative Principle who manifests the infinite cosmic ocean of Shiva, or Consciousness into all of the expressed waves of this creation. Shakti wakens this latent Consciousness and takes Shiva outward, centrifugally, into creation until the subtle wave of Shiva collapse into mind, then into energy, and eventually into solid matter, or “star-stuff.” With evolution of life and the expression of consciousness in continually subtler and subtler forms, life, this “blot of protoplasm with an urge,” eventually becomes conscious of itself. Trees, mammals, plants, and humans all have developed forms of consciousness which manifests in miraculous forms of organizing, adapting, and growing despite the material world’s entropy all around them! Eventually, these evolving microcosmic minds will become so aware of themselves that they will be able to ask themselves where this awareness comes from. This is the arrival of awareness at the anahata and vishuddha chakras. With the awakening of the kundalini, the developed vishuddha chakra begins to spin centripetally as the 16 petals or sound pulsations vibrate the 4 vortexes of the muladhara, or base chakra. It is like a whirling, astral tornado that creates a vortex from crown to coccyx. This 4x4 action covers every possible expression, every possible vortex of the muladhara from escaping outward into the sensory mind at the first chakra. The causal mind with all of its controlling strings of sound take charge of all of the inferior chakras by descending all the way to the lowest base of muladhara. It is an inner, highly organized and intelligent womb of sound and pulsation that awakens the kundalini. All energy that goes into the emotional expressions of the vrttis or vortexes gets sucked inward. This inward, centripetal symphony pulls and summons the kundalini upward and inward with all of the vital energy of the body. Here Shakti begins to act and create deep inside one's soul. Shiva is the quiet eye of the storm looking on from high above. Both Shiva and Shakti arrange the path of bliss, the ananda marga, so that the aspirant may find one's way through the various labyrinths of the ascending mind. This is the case with a prepared mind, however.
The structures of the individual and the collective minds are one and the same, they are interdependent and and co-existent. It is like a football fan in an arena filled with other football fans. Gain or loss affect both the individual and the collective body. Together, they

form some form of meta-identity that both the individual and the collectivity depend upon, or believe that they do. In this similarity, we can see how the kundalini awakenings of individuals will parallel the awakenings of the collective and vice-versa. After 50 years of consciousness revolution in the West, and most of it inspired by hallucinogenic drugs, it is easy to find a plethora of examples of kundalini awakenings that have gone awry. This is most often because the voyaging pioneer of mystical consciousness was not psychologically prepared and/or awakened the kundalini through forced yogic means or through the use of psychedelics. Aggressive yoga techniques and psychedelics usually have the same results: states that resemble a schizophrenic crack-up. Even with cases of eventually successful awakenings, such as that of the Indian seer, Gopikrishna, are often agonizing and take one to the border of self-annihilation while on the path to Self-Realization. This blast of Shakti, or Shakti, is simply too much for the average mind to bear. Could you just imagine what would happen to the average materialist, Big-Mac devouring, semi-conscious mind when it gets a dose of charged super consciousness? The clay jug of the self is shattered to pieces. Mystics and geniuses pick up the pieces and make colorful, beautiful, and playful collages and celebrate the dissolution of separateness into wholeness. The mundane person just finds his/her life is falling apart and cracks up. We, as a species, have no choice in the matter: the rules of the game are changing. We must evolve emotionally, intellectually, and spiritually or disappear from the planet; there really is no other alternative. All of the old mental structures that have projected and created our social, economic, cultural, and science are quickly becoming obsolete. In fact, they are already so rotten that they are taking us down with them. It is the desire of the collective and individual human mind to transcend obstacles that will decide whether one is part of the new humanity or not. If so, evolution will shoulder you and guide you. If not, and the mind wants to remain in the old and conventional, then entropy and decay will recycle one back into the planet for better use.
Kundalini is the root energy behind all mental expressions. Mind is a derivative of pure consciousness or Shiva that Shakti created long before the Big Bang. Shakti, as kundalini on the return journey, can mend any distortion and bring righteousness to our every wrong if we only understand her Way. Shakti and Shiva are fundamentally one, and kundalini only wants to return to her beloved Shiva. One must have a developed anahata chakra, humility coupled with unswerving confidence and much experience in meditation to adapt to this higher flow. The lower propensities must be greatly purified, otherwise one will be pouring gasoline onto the bonfire of the ambitious, clinging, and fearful ego. It isn't the case that the kundalini of the masses will awaken and surge into the brain and rapidly transform and rescue us all. The changing planetary conditions of the present is really what is making us a race of insane simians. Nature wants to awaken us while our contemporary pseudo-culture only deadens us and holds up psycho-spiritual evolution. Few seem to be finding balance. Most nervous systems aren't prepared for what is already happening to us via the subtle mechanisms of nature. Although the subtle, inner laws of Shakti will be as gentle as possible, it will be difficult for the awakening of the masses from the brute unconsciousness to just even begin to vibrate at the second, svadhistana chakra. The collective kundalini force is mainly focused on entering the second chakra and creating balance there. Here, at the sensory-intellectual or conceptual mind, we develop notions of self and world. There can be no balanced kundalini awakening if one hasn't a balanced connection with the external world via the svadhistana chakra. A strong svadhistana chakra isn't co-dependent nor conventional but rests its value on its confidence and congruence with the real world of Shiva-Shakti's universe. A spiritual aspirant seeks not union with nationalism, with social class, or any other “ism” except universalism. The whole universe is our homeland and it is contained within Brahma, the union of Purush-Shakti. Only those who can venture to take this step will move onward. Now is the time of the great purging.
Balanced people, no matter how intellectually developed they are, will move up an evolutionary “notch” from their respective positions. It is much easier for a happy and emotionally healthy goat-herder in the desert to move inward than it is for a neurotic, apparently sophisticated, urban intellectual. The important thing is that all people try to expand from their present state, no matter what it is. Nature seeks balance and makes no prejudiced distinction between high and low. All microcosms are dear to Brahma. This is what is most important. However, the sad truth is that we as a species gradually grow sicker and more and more unfit and unable to make this critical step. True spiritual culture that cultivates deep awareness and moral responsibility is unavailable or inaccessible to most. Due to this, human intellectual and emotional life is becoming extremely imbalanced. There is very little correspondence between who one is on the inside and who one is on the outside. This contradiction will some day be understood as the underlying cause of the extinction of the old humanity. We must build a new and universal human culture on the ashes of the present one. Nature's Heraclitian fire both consumes and illumines, conserves and destroys. Only when the deepest desires of our vast, inner nature find expression in universal human culture, where all particular flowers are seen as part of the same beautiful garden, will we have a society and culture that is truly humane. Our glory is yet to be.

<strong>The New Humanity</strong>

I feel certain that the solution to the electromagnetic imbalances that are so greatly affecting the collective consciousness of the planet is quite simple and clear: take refuge in a higher ground. This planet maintains a balance with gravitational and electromagnetic forces by which our consciousness, a complex process involving the glandular and nervous system as well as the mind and Consciousness, has evolved and adapted over millions of years. Despite the fact that many people are having some severe problems of maladaptation to these new conditions, there is a great potential to make some huge leaps in personal and collective awareness.
While contemplating the effect of the increase of solar activity and its effect on the earth’s magnetic field I find my mind always returning to the idea that all forces in this manifested universe are but the result of three fundamental forces; the positive, the

negative, and the neutral; or the centrifugal, the centripetal and the neutral. There appears to be an extreme bipolar tendency in the collective mind. Almost everybody I know is in some sort of emotional and/or existential crisis. If not crisis, then at least a great challenge that requires tremendous effort to maintain equilibrium and keep moving forward. Nobody I know has it easy these days. These forces are external to our Consciousness, our Atman, but appear to affect us because our minds are incarnated in physical bodies with sensitive organs that are affected by electromagnetic fields. Due to this adjustment there are many subtle imbalances in the nervous and glandular systems that are altering how the mind thinks, feels and perceives reality. However, meditation and spiritual practice have the reverse affect. The Atman as the nucleus of consciousness vibrates the contemplative, meditative mind with eternal peace and clarity and the mind thereby vibrates the nervous system with this much needed balm of soothing alleviation that puts our physical being back into balance.
While the centripetal and centrifugal forces are fighting out their eternal game of clash and cohesion, the neutral force has the capacity to balance them out, take them into the nucleus of awareness and find a higher synthesis. But where is one to find this neutralizing force, this mediator of the centripetal and centrifugal forces that dominate the physical universe? The neutral force, the equalizing force is to be found not in extroversion or introversion, nor action or inaction, attraction nor repulsion, but in deep attention and presence of these plays of the mind. It is the One presence behind each and every microcosmic mind that maintains the balance of the entire Macrocosm. The entire universe has been, is being, and will always be directed by the One who directs all duality. If you want to bring the mind and emotions into balance it is only through awareness of this blissful entity that this play of forces may take refuge in the eternal repose of the Atman. As Anandamurti said, “the force that guides the stars guides you too.” Perhaps we are in a leap, a shift in evolution which is always and extreme and violent act, but I cannot deny that it is all so beautiful, and behind the apparent chaos and imbalance lies a greater, hidden agenda that only the mind devoted to its source and origin can understand.
This energetic situation will only become more intense until we as a species, a collective consciousness, begin to understand this truth and cultivate a planetary culture which fosters this
awareness. So many are falling into emotional imbalances and addictions. We go up too high and then we fall too low. We try to fix the lows with a high and are incessantly chasing our tails in a circle. Really, there is only One solution, and I hope that you all may truly be here to presence it and be part of a new, awakening humanity. Take shelter only in the loving, constant witness of the Atman, or the combativeness forces of nature shall rip thy mind apart like a gang of angry pit-bulls.
<strong>Kundalini, Near-Death, and the Future</strong>

Early in the kundalini awakening when I was still a student in the university, I had many experiences that shook my world apart.  There was a period where I had many strange visions that didn’t make sense to me until years later.  During meditation I would feel that I was merging into the whole city of Austin around me.   My mind would expand outward beyond the city and I would get lost in bliss.  It was terrifying yet exhilarating.  It was the death of the little "I," In one of these experiences I had a waking dream in which I knew I was seeing myself 5 years in the future.  I was in Austin but on a farm outside the city where I was very happy and at peace.  I thought to myself that it was absurd because I had no plans of remaining in Austin after graduation.  I forgot all about this dream until I found myself at this very same farm 5 years later.  The details of the vision like a telephone line crossing the property by a creek proved exact.  Meanwhile, back in '94, the vision continued.  In the next part of the vision I knew it was 10 years into the future now and the scene changed.  I was in Mexico in the middle of a war.  I felt very tense in this part of the vision but the scene changed into a third scene where I was far above Austin, almost in outer space.  I looked down and the world was very different.  The coast line was much more inward.  There were fewer people but there was much more respect between them.  I saw that they understood the lesson that nature gave them.    I didn’t know when in the future this third part of the vision occurred, just that it was sometime after the Mexico part.  I wasn’t even sure if I was alive on the planet, or floating without a body in some ethereal space from where I was observing in the dream.  It didn’t matter because there was finally peace.

I don’t necessarily believe in prophecies, but when a vision has proven right 2 out of 3 times, then my ears start to perk up a little about the third part.

complete text of Microvita and Tantra Maya under "Books" tab.

#tantra #tantramaya #yoga #microvita
