---
title: Microvita and Tantra Maya ch.5 "The Negative Mentities"
tags: Microvita
comments: true
layout: post
--- 

{% capture images %}
	/images/microvita.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
The so-called “positive mentities” are entities that aid human beings with their psycho-spiritual development. Just as there are these entities that help us by promoting our positive tendencies, there are also entities that promote, provoke and exacerbate our baser tendencies. A working, practical definition of negative microvita would be the entities that function through the vrttis of the manipura and lower vortexs. The positive mentities affect the vrttis of the anahata and higher vortexs. </span></span>
 All mentities function through the medium of the vrttis. The negative mentities function in the same manner as the positive in that they too act as mental faculties for microcosms. They too are not entities separate from the microcosm. They are the causal forces that control the negative vrttis. Whereas the positive mentities act as a guiding function furthering psycho-spiritual evolution, the negative pirate the mind, directing it toward baseness. All mentities act as superpersonal forces that dictate the personal expressions of an individual mind.</span></span>

 The negative mentities vary in their degrees of function. Just as some positive mentities are more subtle and spiritual than others, there are degrees of negative mentities. There are the common negative mentities that function in the majority of minds that sustain their individual and collective fears, insecurities, jealousies, self-doubt, etc. There are also extremely negative forms of negative mentities that create paranoias, pathological fears and aggressions, and even ideas of suicide and self-destruction.</span></span>

 Each type of negative mentity funciton through the medium of the mind's vrttis. For example, an entity that is wrathful and aggressive may incite and function through the vrttis of anger and resentment. An entity that always inhibits ones potentials to achieve and be effective in life's endeavors may function through the medium of the vrttis lack of confidence or shame.</span></span>

 Any form of negative mentity serves either as a defense for the minds fears and limitations or is attracted to them. As a human mind is advancing up through the rungs of psychic evolution, he or she is still carrying so many propensities of the manipura and Svadhistana Vortexs. Therefore, they are also propelled by the controlling entities of these propensities. For example, a mind has gone through several lifetimes of perpetual fear. Perhaps an original experience of almost drowning provoked an intense fear that allowed a certain entity to take root in the mind. This energy of fear injects all kinds of precautions into the mind so that it stays away from danger, thus avoiding any similar situations to the original trauma. Perhaps it is still present in future lives. The person doesn't know why they are so fearful of bodies of water and psychologically cannot pinpoint a trigger in his present life. All he knows is that he is fearful. The controlling force of fear and the personal ego's feeling live and have lived in constant association in that they seem inseparable. The mind cannot distinguish its feelings and thoughts from the microvita that control them. This is an example of how a mentity is lodged in the mind and has served as a defense mechanism.</span></span>

 Another way in which mentities function is through an attraction to present circumstances. Let us say that a person finds himself in a very challenging life situation. There is too much conflict and stress for the ego to manage with intelligence and understanding. Out of desperation the mind finds more instinctual ways to perpetuate its existence. It reverts back toward a more unconscious, compulsive (2<sup>nd</sup> vortex) mode of operation. This mode of operation gives the mind a seemingly sure and definite goal as opposed to a confused rational ego that cannot maintain the demands of higher awareness. With compulsion thought and action are blind and there is no need to think and decide, (which is precisely his weakness right now). Ones freedom is handed back over to instinctuality, and perhaps other forces too. What may happen is that the mind can continue to degenerate to the extent that it begins to loose control of its faculties. Compulsive behavior always begets negative reactions and further compulsive actions until the person is in a total state of confusion and degeneration. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> When a mind becomes so far disassociated from itself, when the central, rational ego holding all of its faculties together is sufficiently weakened, then it is possible for another mental entity to take possession of this mind.</span></span>

The quality of microvita that “enters” is entirely dependent upon the mental vibration of the host. Remember, that microvita always function through the medium of the vrttis. In this case the mind is resonating so intensely with compulsion that it allows a mental energy with a sympathetic vibration to unify with him. Recall, how with a positive mentity a person begins to resonate at a very subtle mental level in that they begin to resonate with the positive mentity regulating that particular noble expression. With the negative mentity, it is a similar model. The form is the same, only the content differs. The compulsive mind merges with the dense energy controlling this level of macrocosmic expression. It is as if one has merged oneself with the dark deity of compulsion.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> If one has only slightly degenerated and can still maintain some centrality to the personality, perhaps this energy only lurks beneath the surface, waiting for the opportune moment to siege the mind and all of its faculties. It is indeed a dangerous situation. The mental parasite is already present and only has to be triggered. This force will lure and attract what is left of the conscious personality into obscurity. However, for a mind deranged to the point of insanity, in which all of the ego's efforts to maneuver and mobilize the energies under its domain have failed, this entity has the ability to completely posses the personality. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The mind always becomes one with its object of ideation. It is a square, unformed block which can be splintered into oblivion with a destructive intention, or can be cultivated and carved to the finest sublimity. When the mind moves toward the Spirit the positive microvita help convert into spirit. When the mind moves toward materiality and instinctuality, then it merges with them.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> As previously stated, the ego doesn't normally recognize the existence of these energies. They merely function unconsciously through the medium of their propensities. And for the average person, many of their vrttis themselves are unconscious. Many people are psychologically very unconnected with the reasons why they are angry, jealous, fearful, ambitious and so forth.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> However, for a person cultivating their mind through a very pinnacled and powerful meditation that is designed to purify the mind by transmuting the vrttis, there may come a point in time where they are not only just aware of their own unconscious feelings and thought patterns, but also that there is an entity behind them.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> One reaches this point only after a great degree of transmuting a negative propensity. Each time one confronts a conflict with oneself, one goes deeper and deeper into the core of the complex. The more one moves forward, into the light, the more one also, retraces into the darkness in order to shed their newfound light on the pending, clinging unconscious that still haunts them. One eventually comes into contact with the ringleader, the archetypal mentity at the root of the complex. At this point, there is often a psychological struggle of life and death for the entity that the aspiring mind is still bound to. The mentity is threatened by the fact that the noble mind is letting go of its limitations and no longer needs Mr. Compulsion to help out when times become difficult. Therefore Mr. Compulsion asserts himself with all of his force so as to not let go of his base of operation, the host mind.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> In these times the aspirant must be determined to surmount his limitations, have the responsibility to see himself thoroughly so as not to let this entity hide somewhere in his mind, have the knowledge of how to transmute this energy, the dedication to implement this knowledge in his practice and meditation, and the devotion to allow Brahma to guide him through this situation.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> It is at this time that the force of the teacher is of utmost importance. One day the Indian saint Ramakrishna was walking along the Ganges. He saw that there was a snake attempting to swallow a frog. Because the frog was so large and the snake so small, the snake was practically choking on the frog. Both were suffering. Ramakrishna likened this to the force of the teacher and the samskaras of the disciple. The teacher needs to have the strength to devour it with one bite instead of remaining choking on it.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> While it is possible for the student to surmount his/her samskaras and the negative microvita associated with them, it is a very slow and difficult process. A real teacher can hasten this process, if there is sufficient spiritual force within him/her, so that the disciple passes through this trial more swiftly and safely.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The teacher may negotiate the samskaras and negative mentities of the disciple. Perhaps they are absorbed into the teacher and thereby transmuted and dissolved. Or, they are loosened up and purged out of the disciples mind by the mental force of the teachers spiritual vibration, left to wander the astral realms waiting for another host and victim.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> This is the reason that a competent teacher is necessary with Tantric meditation. Without one, the aspirant may plunge himself intensely into the mysteries of the mind without a road map and the force to move upward. The teacher provides this road map, and, when necessary, the force to move upward.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Here, it is necessary to explain the difference between a negative mentities in the form of a disembodied microcosm and a macrocosmic faculty. It was stated that the teacher may dislodge the negative entity, or absorb it into himself.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> When the parasitic influence on the mind is but a singular, disembodied entity, a microcosm without a body, then it is not as difficult to dislodge its negative influence. It is basically one microcosmic influence against another and the teacher may intervene. However, when the influence behind the mind is a macrocosmic faculty,an archetype, it is an entity that controls many minds (macrocosmic) that is influencing this particular microcosm. In this case, one is under the spell of an archetype and because of its power to govern many minds, it is more difficult to transform.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> So that one can understand this more clearly it is necessary to distinguish these two effects. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The purpose of a teacher is to help make one sufficiently strong enough to surmount all negative influences, be it microcosmic or macrocosmic. At times, however, it may be necessary for the guide to help overcome a negative samskara and the mentity connected to it. If it is a singular negative mentity in the form of a disembodied microcosm, then the power of the spiritual thought wave of the master can repel the attachment of the negative mentity. If the disciple is under the spell of a negative archetype, a macrocosmic faculty connected to negative propensities, then the work is more difficult. Only a mind with sufficient power to effect the collective psychic faculties can have any effect on the influence of a negative archetype. First and foremost it is necessary for the disciple to transform and change his/her negative vrttis and cultivate the positive. If this is successful then there is a transfer of one's psychic equilibrium towards the subtle and the influence of a negative archetype cannot find a bearing in a purified mind. However, if the disciple cannot shake its influence, either due to insufficient moral force or the overbearing force of a negative macrocosmic faculty, then the teacher may intervene. However, this work is extremely arduous for the teacher. It signifies a storming of the Halls of Valhalla. A microcosm, albeit and elevated one connected to the mind of Brahma, must confront a dark god; in this case the negative archetype. As said, only a mind capable of effecting the collective, macrocosmic vibration may combat and transform such a mind. This activity entails the teacher removing the negative samskara from the disciple and taking it on himself. Because the samskara is connected with such a powerfully negative causal force, the psychic and spiritual power of the teacher must be immense enough to surmount this negative gravity. All of the spiritual force of the teacher that is dedicated to elevating the minds of all macrocosms is now in a battle with this negative force. It is precisely due to this dynamic that so many otherwise noble teachers take a spiritual fall when they take on disciples. They were capable of transforming their personal limitations, but not those of many others. Others, and there have been many in history, suffer ill health and die a premature death due to taking the samskaras of their disciples. They die so that others may move onward. A few others surmount these negative influences and become even more powerful than before. The struggle to overcome negative macrocosmic influences has made them even more capable of taking on crudity and degeneration.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"><b>Psorax </b></span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Anybody who has looked into the abyss of his or her consciousness knows that the abyss looks back at you, as Nietzche said. The unconscious mind is a very live and active zoo of escaped animals raging about in pure chaos and savagery. Does their years of pent-up frustration make them even more crazy when they finally escape? And in all of this unintelligible impulse speaks back from the chasm some kind of insidious intelligence. In modern psychology, this hidden intentionality has been called the id, the shadow, or the unconscious. Pluma Blanca called this entity “psorax”. His definition of this entity of the unconscious is much more mystical and profound than any other explanation that I know. It is more of a practical understanding of how the mind creates frustrated realities that remain trapped within one, like an itch under the skin. He called it psorax because he saw it as the vital, pranic energy that becomes contaminated and gets trapped behind the skin, in the physical body. This blocked vitality distorts the body’s natural functions and may accumulate like a festering sore attracting more mental parasites like itself to itself, thus making a hodge-podge stew of evil and illness. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">This idea makes more sense when one understands deeply the relation between the mind and the body and how prana, or vital energy moves between them. Psorax is a trapped energy, a mental plasm that can’t effectively project itself outwardly as it would like to. Each time it does it becomes even more frustrated. It has the intelligence of mind behind it, but the frustrated intentionality toward matter, or the physical body pulling upon it. This is the reason that by living with false ideas about oneself or the world is the greatest danger of conscious, human existence. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Materialism is the greatest of deprivations as it destroys the mind slowly but surely. Not having this clarity and responsibility of how each one of us is a co-creator in this creation always leads to a fall. Psorax is a psycho-physical entity that in some ways is self-created by the individual while at the same time is aided by the fact that there are exchanges between these entities of psorax between human beings, or minds incarnated in physical human bodies. One can receive as well as transmit this psychic virus in much the same way that one receives and transmits physical viruses. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">A practical example: you are at peace. There are only a few light, positive thoughts in the mind and some pleasant feelings. Behind this subtle activity of mind is a deep, mysterious witness that just pleasantly is. Out of nowhere, it seems, there enters a dark, violent image on the mental scene. Is it my own unconscious attacking my peace, or is it because another person has come near and I sense his suffering? If I’m not at peace, then I may never understand and just get locked into a reception and transmission of negativity. This seed wants to take root within me, it vibrates my body and perhaps excites some memories and fears. It wants to become one with me. Only from a state of deep calm and non-judgement one can begin to witness these activities; how they affect the mind, change the feelings, and even how and where these influences vibrate and take root in the physical body. Most importantly is to distinguish your’s from another’s psorax. Pluma Blanca was an advanced yogi as well as a healer, and used his pinnacled knowledge to observe these phenomenon, how they create physical and mental illness, and developed ways of curing these ailments based on this understanding. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Deep, sincere meditation is of course the most effective manner of seeing and processing the shadow, but this depends on so much: mental health, physical health, determination and discernment that are only developed by ardent efforts in one’s spiritual life. In yoga, yama and niyama is the base of this practice. This practical morality imparts self awareness and practical universal ideas of how to maintain mental balance through proper personal and social responsibility. Without these fundamental ideas of humanism imparted to individuals one is but a mix of animal impulses and social determination, or a game of Russian roulette. A society without spiritual principles that foster ethical awareness is but a vehicle for destructive, unconscious forces where psorax takes all into the abyss. I think this is why Pluma Blanca lived in a cave and only taught a few good people. Anandamurti, on the other hand, impulsed others to fight within society against the depraving effects of what he termed “negative microvita”. Both are right according to who they were, where they were, and what they expressed as enlightened individuals. Its not enough to believe and conceptualize about such things. Beliefs and opinions give rise to superstition and dogmas about ghosts, hauntings, and possessions, and the like. Without the efforts of both of these men who spoke about these phenomenon in the most practical and scientific manner possible to speak of such phenomenon, I know that I would be even more in the dark about understanding negative microvita or psorax, and perhaps be yapping about the devil and hell-fire and salvation. </span></span>
