---
title: Microvita and Tantra Maya ch.7 "Mentities and Biopsychology"
tags: Microvita
comments: true
layout: post
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/microvita.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
Both positive and negative mentities are entities that function at the mental level but also provoke changes in the biopsychology of organisms. If we review the kosas and understand how grosser levels of mind are products of subtler ones, and that the physical body (mention annamaya kosa!!! Also the sounds of the vrttis) is the grossest level of mind then we can understand a little clearer the complex phenomenon of biopsychology. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The mentities always function from a level beyond the physical body. There are cruder types of microvita that function at the physical level, such as various viruses. However, the types of microvita discussed in this work are the microvita related to human psychology, mentities. The subtlest, positive mentity act from the higher kosas like the intuitive and causal levels at the anahata and Vishuddha Vortexs, respectively. The negative mentities may function at the manipura and lower vortexs. The vrttis that they stimulate create a mental vibration at the level of mind or vortex in which they are active. This mental vibration has a cascading effect upon all of the vortexs and levels of mind beneath that of the origin until it eventually arrives into physical expression in the annamaya kosa or physical body. In other words, each higher vortex is a causal agent for the ones beneath it.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Depending on the quality of the original mental vibration, the lower vortexs will be affected in a similar fashion. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">For example, let’s say there is a negative mentity related to a defensive, fearful personality. This construct in the mind continually stimulates the vrtti of argumentativeness, for example. This vrtti serves as a defense for the personality at the anahata level that has not the capacity to reason deeply and evaluate oneself with fairness (viveka, or conscience). This negative vibration cascades downward into the rest of the vortexs and mental layers until it reaches physical expression in the body. When it reaches the Manipura Vortex, ones dynamic mental defenses and aggressiveness are stimulated (hatred, fear and slander). Even further are these defenses stimulated in the second vortex where the base of the personality is preserved. The kamamaya kosa or sensual mind is attuned attentively to the conflict. And once the cascading vibration reaches the body the nervous system and especially the adrenal glands are stimulated to keep the mind and body in a state of excitement for its state of contention. Perhaps there is also tension in the liver because the mind is closed off to put things in a newer perspective. These reactions in the body, if sustained, may produce a result of various illnesses or imbalances due to prolonged over secretion or under secretion of hormones from the glandular system and/or improper function of the organs due to imbalances in the nervous system.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">This is just one example of how mentities are causal agents in human biopsychology. All mentities functioning at the mental levels have a similar causal chain of effect. They only differ in the quality of psychic energies that they effect which, in turn, create different physical results. For example, positive mentities create harmonious, growth promoting thoughts and feelings in our consciousness. These positive, elevating mental states of mind have a balancing effect on the nervous, glandular and organ systems of the body. The nervous system is acute and placid, the glandular secretions are balanced, and the organ functions are properly regulated. Positive mentities also promote the development of the glandular and nervous systems. Science is just beginning to understand endocrinology. Mentities stimulate the glandular function so that newer, more highly evolved bio-psychological functioning are activated. Therefore, mentities aid in the evolution of human physico-psychic-spiritual evolution.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Because all levels within the body-mind system of kosas are interdependent, a change at one level effects a change at others (mention also reverse causality from down-up), a change in psycho-spiritual awareness must accompany a corresponding biological change. This is what is termed “physico-psycho-spiritual parallelism”. A fine-tuning of the nervous and glandular systems must accompany this modification in mental and spiritual awareness. Actually, the two are mutually interdependent. A change can’t occur in the mind and spirit if there are not also the mechanisms for biological change, and vice-versa. Many yogis who undergo intense spiritual experiences experience much physical discomfort, even illness, due to the fact that their bodies must undergo a tremendous transformation to accompany the changes in their mind and spirit due to their accelerated spiritual growth via mystical experiences. It may often take one many years for the body to adjust to the shock of a powerful kundalini awakening. Similarly, the personality must mature in order to accommodate these spiritual awakenings. This entails a great mental purification of all of the complexes binding one to the illusional, separate ego.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">It is interesting to note that the vortexs physically correspond to the major endocrine glands of the human body. The vortexs “physically correspond” to these areas in that they relate to the body at the following particular points. The vortexs are non-physical mental stations that connect the subtle, abstract mind to the concrete, physically located body. The Muladhara Vortex is, for males, just behind the prostate gland. The svadhistana is behind the genital organs. The Manipura Vortex is at the center of the body, relating to the kidney, adrenals, liver, pancreas, gall bladder, and intestines. The Anahata Vortex is right behind the thymus gland in the chest. The Vishuddha Vortex is located just behind the thyroid gland. The Ajina Vortex, the “third eye”, is the controller of the pituitary gland. And the Sahasrara Vortex is the master above the pineal gland. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">The practices of Eight Fold Yoga and the Tantric meditation techniques regulate imbalances as well as purify and develop the mind-vortex-glandular systems of the human being. Asanas or physical yoga postures have a physico-psychic effect on the organism. The physical postures stretch the muscles thus relieving their tensions created by the nervous system. Therefore, proper blood flow reaches the glands and organs while they are stimulated and massaged by the physical postures. Anandamurti spoke of how the asanas have an effect of compression and decompression on the glands and organs, thus regulating their hormonal secretions and functioning. With this proper balance in the muscular, nervous, glandular, and organ systems the vital energy in the body is not blocked and can perform its appropriate functions. When the vital energies are not perturbed, the mind is not perturbed. This overall effect relieves the psychic tensions in the mind because the physical and psychic imbalances created by the mind’s samskaras are relieved. The higher parts of Eight Fold Yoga are to purify the samskaras that propel the mind to imbalance the body-mind system. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Recall the diagrams of book I on the chapter on spiritual practice. Diagram 1 show a mind imbalanced by many complexes in the Manipura Vortex: shame, hatred, fear, etc. Imagine the bio-psychological scenario of such a person. Constant anger and resentment weaken the liver and gall bladder. The liver has a psychic </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> <b>The State of Mind Before Meditation</b></span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">function that allows us to put things into perspective and perceive the “big picture” of a situation. The gall bladder, psychically speaking, helps absorb the mental shock that can affect the image and form of the personality that the liver upholds. In other words, the gall bladder absorbs the shocks of the liver. If the mind is closed off, resisting awareness, then the mind is prone to anger and frustration. Continual anger wares down the defenses of the gall bladder. In turn, the liver becomes also is in a sense “closed off” like the mind, thus warping its proper biopsychological function. It is interesting to note that the direction of the propensity of hatred in the manipura shoots off in the direction directly towards the liver. Vrtti literally means “whirlpool” and this perturbation of psychic energy whirls directly toward the liver. Not only is the liver not functioning properly as a corresponding organ to the psychic state of mind, but also cannot perform its biological functions properly. (insert this diagram with organ and glandular diagram) </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Therefore one’s digestion is weakened, the blood is improperly filtered, and one may become more susceptible to diseases of the liver like hepatitis or even cancer.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Also, there may be an mentity of fear governing the mind. The propensity of fear moves directly toward the kidneys and adrenals. In oriental medicine the kidneys and adrenals are seen as part of an integral mind-body energetic system. When the kidneys and adrenals function well the mental will is well balanced and properly directed. Also they help to balance the energy levels of the body and mind that the will needs to direct the personality. When mind and body are balanced there is a steady reservoir of vitality and vigor. There is a general level of well being and the mind is neither agitated nor inert.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Fear disturbs this equilibrium and consumes the will and vitality in a state of constant alarm. The overall health deteriorates as this mental and physical vigor is consumed by fear. The muscles along the spinal column near the kidneys and adrenals are tense and blood flow is restricted. Adrenaline and cortisol are secreted at excessively high rates and toxify the tissues and nervous system.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">At the biological level, when speaking of chemical and hormonal imbalances it is easy to lose track of the fact that the deep recesses of the mind are the causal factors. Mentities, acting as essential archetypes, are the root cause of mental phenomenon, of thoughts and feelings. Modern medical science is only just beginning to realize the relation between the mind and the body. For science, if the existence of a non-physical mind is admitted at all, it is only a hypothetical entity, entirely abstract in character. Tantra and microvita science give a much more comprehensive understanding of biopsychology. Not only does microvita science uphold the view that all physical phenomenon, microcosmic or macrocosmic, are dependent upon subtler levels of mind and energy, but that there are very specific dynamics and constructs (vrttis and their controlling microvita) that govern the mental life.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Imagine the complexity: the physical body is but a manifestation of a mind with all of its kosas and vortexs and vrttis. All of these are so intricately interconnected and interdependent. The vortexs are the base of their corresponding vrttis and relate with corresponding macrocosmic worlds and elements (lokas and bhutas). The vrttis stimulate the glands and organs of the physical body but are functions of the microcosmic mind. And mentities control the expressions of vrttis from a macrocosmic level! </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">It is only when the mind is connected to the Shiva, the nucleus of Mind, is it possible to have the subtle vantage point to view all of these happenings within Creation. As Kiirkegaard exclaimed: “Even the fall of a sparrow moves Thee, but nothing changes Thee!” </span></span>
