---
title: Microvita and Tantra Maya ch.8 "The Cultivation of Positive Mentities"
tags: Microvita
comments: true
layout: post
---  

{% capture images %}
	/images/microvita.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
The cultivation of positive mentities is a topic very much related to proper biopsychological functioning. The human nervous, endocrine and glandular systems are the physical, corporeal vehicles for the subtle mind. They must all be in optimal health for the mind to be able to resonate with positive mentities and their corresponding mental layers and propensities. Any changes in the mental structure are reflected in the body and vice-versa. For proper psycho-physical parallelism the body must support the mind and the mind must support the body.

The body and mind are a continuum on a spectrum of created energies ranging from the kamamaya kosa at the solid factor to the root of mind in the ajina chakra. Therefore, there is no real and definite distinction between body and mind. Body is but the crudest expression of mind. Any change in the structure and function of the mind entails a necessary change in the physical body, and vice-versa.

Although a mentity functions through the medium and vibratory level of the mental layers or kosas, it has an indirect effect upon the physical body. The body must be capable of being a physical conduit for newer and subtler mental energies. Therefore, a positive mentity cannot function nor enter a mind with a body incapable of conducting such energies. It would be like a human grabbing onto a high-voltage power line. Therefore the body must be healthy and balanced, free of disease and weakness. As briefly discussed in the previous chapter, all of the organ and glandular systems connected with the vrttis must be in proper working order, and not overtaxed by imbalanced vrttis. The nervous system in general should be strong and healthy.

After having a balanced bio-psychological system, the cultivation of a strong nervous system is vital for microvita to function. A strong nervous system entails a system with a reservoir of vitality as the mind is not overconsuming one’s vitality; the nerves are not dull, but are responsive to mind and resonate harmoniously with ones pranic or energetic, astral body. Therefore the mind-brain system must be very refined, awake, and conscious. The mind-brain functions with exactness and precision when called into action, and is placated and calm when under the influence of spiritual states of consciousness. A weak nervous system is neither sharp and responsive when it needs to be active nor can it be quiescent and receive higher currents of energy through meditation.

To cultivate and maintain this vigor of the nervous system, a yogic lifestyle(or a similar one) is a must. One must be a vegetarian. There must be a strong moral foundation, such as that in the precepts of Yama and Niyama in Eight-Fold Yoga. A mind not morally disciplined wastes precious mental energies and therefore degenerates through sensory indulgence, ambition, anger, sadness, hypocrisy, etc. Asanas, or yogic exercises help to maintain and develop the circulatory, nervous, organ, and glandular systems of the body. Their practice is a must for the fine-attunement of the nervous system so that it can capacitate positive microvita. Meditation also must be an established practice in life. Without meditation there is no concentration of mind, and it is only through concentration of mind on a subtle idea that one can ever discover the higher mental and spiritual levels of ideation. Also, the other fundamental practices of Eight-Fold Yoga, especially pranayama, or breath-control are essential for the development of a spiritually-attuned nervous system.

When the body with its circulatory, nervous, glandular, and organ systems is balanced, it indeed serves as a physical base for the Atman.
When the mind is not obstructed by the physical body, then the realization of the spirit is not obstructed by the vacillations and waywardness of the mind. Body, mind, and spirit are an integrated continuum. Spiritual awareness transduces into the mind and this subtle mental intelligence orders the physical body in a most refined and precise manner.
Just as the spiritual intelligence flows downward into mind and body, physical energy is transmuted upward from the bodies physical energies into more mental energies. And with more mental energy the mind is thereby able to function at higher levels and transmute itself into pure spiritual Consciousness. This process of physical to psychic to spiritual transmutation begins by the transmutation of the seminal fluids [in males] into a finer energetic substance that is used to nourish the cerebral nerves as well as serve as a fuel for the mind. This finer, transmuted substance is known as ojas in Ayurveda and jing in Chinese medicine. This upward flowing process is only capable under certain conditions. First of all the seminal fluid must not be wasted through excessive sexual indulgence. Secondly, there must be a strong moral foundation so that the mind can detach itself from the physical world and the unwholesome physical and psychic desires and mental complexes that arise from them. Thirdly, the mind must be in an ideational flow toward Brahma via the practice of a spiritual, scientific meditation. In other words the chitta must flow towards the aham and the aham must flow towards the mahat, and the mahat, in turn, is transmuted into pure Consciousness, or Shiva.

The ojas is a fluid mental energy that exists at the level of the liquid factor. The seminal fluid, is of course, a physical substance existing in the solid factor. Here we begin to see how the flow of the involution of created elements, or Saincara, begins to reverse through the flow of evolution or Pratisaincara.

With these given conditions the mind has the subtle internal conditions to receive the help of positive mentities. The production of ojas creates a flow of divine love in the mind. All positive mentities move in a flow of love. When there is love of Brahma and its divine qualities, the mentities are ready to assist. Ojas acts as a fuel for the disincarnated mentities who work through the psychic energy or ojas of the incarnated. So the more available ojas, the more one can receive the help of positive mentities. The positive mentities can therefore begin to guide the incarnated microcosm toward higher degrees of awareness according to the needs of the aspirant and the specialty of the microvita effecting him/her.

A very great mind may also be of service to the mentities. In the chapter on positive mentities it was stated that an elevated microcosm deeply connected with the macrocosm could move the collective mind of his/her species on his/her planet. This elevated mind is essentially an ojas factory. The process of transmuting ojas and the flow of constant ideation on Brahma give force to the positive mentities. Instead of them just downloading their speciality in the microcosm, the microcosm uploads energy toward them. Hence, there exists a symbiotic relation between mentity and the incarnated. As the mentities are enforced they can pursue their work elevating the collective mind of humanity.

The following selections are chapters about 8-Fold (Astaunga) Yoga and Yama and Niyama from a Name to the Nameless.

The 8 Steps of Yoga

1 and 2 - Yama and Niyama

How we see the physical world is determined by what level of mind we use to see it. Only in the lower levels of mind is cognitive activity dominated by the senses and cerebral activity. If we purify the Svadhistana, or conceptual level of mind and liberate it from narrow, egoistic thinking, then it is possible to see the world as a projection of thought.  To know this is to change our thoughts and thus change our world. Here is where we realize something very deep about our essence and its connection with a higher, cosmic order that works through our evolving Self awareness, if we allow it to. With the six vortexes of the Svadhistana mind in balance, one can liberate oneself from self-exile and learn to trust that you have a place in the cosmic moral order.

The Svadhistana, Conceptual Mind is capable of abstract thought and therefore the idea of a self naturally arises. It is so important that this “self-establishing” mind be based on love, security, and rationality. Yama and Niyama are simple, yet profound guides for human conduct that foster spiritual awareness and union at all levels awareness and for human, “mind-preponderant,” “self-establishing” beings. The Svadhistana level of mind corresponds to the “liquid factor” of unified energy.  This “liquid” energy is a unified field of waves that collapse and crystallize into the material world, the solid factor.  The liquid factor is more a world of “waves” than a world of “particles.”  Conceptual awareness is greater and we can comprehend our relationship with the natural and social worlds.  This subtle, moral awareness is encompassed within these 10 universal principles. They help keep our external mental projections from reacting, from clashing and bouncing back against the real, living, conscious universe, which is the Macrocosmic Mind of Brahma. To go against the Tao, the cosmic order, will always cause reactions or deformations in the unified field of the liquid factor. The universe always re-adjusts itself from its deformations and we therefore are always experiencing our reactions. “As you think, so you become,”

Tantric yogis realized that in order for a human being to properly develop personally and socially to the degree where they are capable of practicing sadhana, it is necessary to have a moral code of conduct as a friendly guide.  All societies teach norms and customs that ideally should help orient its members toward proper conduct so that there is harmony in that society.  In contemporary society there is less and less wisdom that parents teach their children.  The values people often learn through the media and in society in general teach superficiality, domination, selfishness, and materialism.  Very few people have the notion that they live in a live universe where there really exist certain moral laws of harmony and balance.  So often, those that speak of morality use it as a fearful force to control the behavior of others instead of using moral wisdom to free the mind from distorted ideas.  Religious and ethical systems often give one a “rationale,” a pattern of how to behave.  What they often lack is how to create the conditions to help one realize moral discernment.  Yama and Niyama isn’t about being a good sheep that follows all of the rules like a cog in the system.  This world is relative and there are no hard and fast, inviolable laws that apply to every person in every situation.  The universality of Yama and Niyama consists in the openness of these concepts that the spirit of the idea pervades all possible situations.  For example, ahimsa, the first and most important ethical principle of yama, is not absolute non-violence where the moral law says you can’t kill a mosquito or accidentally step on a bug.  Instead, ahimsa  is the spirit of not having violent intentions toward any entity.  Ahimsa attitude that one carries into every situation, remembering that Shiva is behind all life.  Perhaps this principle doesn’t give you the exact manner to respond to every given situation, but does suggest the spirit of interaction.  If it did tell you exactly what to do, then what would be the value of discernment?    What is important is that one understands violence in all aspects and sincerely tries to never inflict this unconscious destruction upon others.  The basic idea of Yama and Niyama is that all beings are sentient and have an existential  purpose.  All beings need intelligent culture and compassionate nurture.  All of the principles of Yama and Niyama lead to universal love.  All beings are ultimately Shiva, but need a little care and nourishment to realize this.  Yama and Niyama helps inspire this universal sentiment.

The 10 principles of Yama and Niyama are just and very universal spiritual values that are really applicable to all societies in that they are practical values based on dharma, based on our essential nature.  The principles of Yama and Niyama would be the simple, natural goodness of a realized being, a Bodhisattva  They give us a working model of morality, of how a sadhaka, or practitioner of sadhana should behave so as to protect their spirit.  Their understanding helps the individual not just to adapt to society, but to help one understand the deep truth and purpose of morality.  Yama and Niyama aren’t so much divine commandments as they are practical guides to conduct.  For the Svadhistana mind to develop properly in a secure social environment and with self confidence, Yama and Niyama are indispensable.  They keep the mind free of complexes generated by ignorant and selfish impulses that make sadhana impossible.  What enforces and inspires morality isn’t the threat of punishment so much as the understanding of action and reaction.  Good moral education cultivates the discerning intellect so that the physical desires aren’t just repressed but properly understood.   When one sees that suffering and alienation are the result of selfish, unconscious actions, then one truly wants to find a path of activity that purifies and liberates instead of enslaving one to unwholesome desires.  The 5 principles of Yama teach balance in social behavior, while the 5 principles of Niyama orient one toward basic spiritual discipline.  They are as follows:

Yama:  Social practices
<ol>
	<li>Ahim’sa: Not to inflict pain or hurt on anybody with intention by thought, word or action,</li>
	<li>Satya: The benevolent use of mind and words with compassionate truthfulness.</li>
	<li>Asteya: To renounce the desire to acquire the wealth or qualities of others.</li>
	<li>Brahmacarya: To keep the mind always absorbed in Brahma and see all beings as Brahma’s expression.</li>
	<li>Aparigraha: Live simply and avoid material excess.</li>
</ol>
Niyama:  Personal practices
<ol>
	<li>Shaoca:   Purity of the body, mind, and environment.</li>
	<li>Santos’a: Mental equipoise and peace of mind.</li>
	<li>Tapah: To undergo hardship for the welfare of others through selfless service.</li>
	<li>Sva’dhya’ya: The study and proper understanding of spiritual scriptures and philosophical books.</li>
	<li>Iishvara pran’idha’na: To take shelter or meditate on Iishvara, the Supreme Consciousness.</li>
</ol>
3 - Asana  Asanas are yoga “innercizes”.  They are physical postures synchronized with deep breathing to bring a mindful caress of subtle prana into the body.  They keep the body fit and the mind balanced by fine-tuning the endocrine system.  The contorted stretches actually massage and stimulate the muscles and nerves around the endocrine glands so that nerve signals and blood flow aren’t stagnant.  The breathing is slow and deep and the mind studies its relationship with the body and understands how the mental vrttis express themselves bio-psychologically.  One feels where the vrttis come from and has a more acute sensitivity to prana or subtle energy that flows within the body and in the environment.  Such a calm mind is more able to focus on meditation.

4 - Pranayama  Pranayama is literally the “control of prana.”  This is done by regulating the breath.  The flow of subtle prana corresponds with the flow of physical air in respiration.  When one breaths deeply the prana is calm and this calms the mind as well.  Prana is mental energy.  When it is not occupied with active states of body and mind it can concentrate deeply like a focused laser.  All of the energy that escapes through the vrttis is prana and the control of prana regulates the expression of the vrttis.  Without this expenditure of mental energy dissipated in excessive mental activity, this refined, potentialized energy can help focus the mind.  Normally it is the prana that vibrates the chitta.  Prana is an intermediary in the brain-mind relation.  Normally, we only see how our minds vibrate with the sensory world, but with pranayama we can understand how the guided prana through pranayama begins to color and qualify the interior landscape of intuition.  Pranayama gives one the concentrated mental energy necessary not just for deeper meditation, but for transforming the body and the mind.  The internalization of prana begins to change the entire nervous and glandular system in ways that are still far away from being understood by our physical science.

5 -  Pratyahara  Pratyahara is sensory withdrawal.  Once the mind is balanced by yama and niyama and begins to develop more rapidly through asanas and pranayama, sensory withdrawal becomes quite natural.  The suspended, quieted prana due to pranayama allows the mind to be very calm and focused.  The inner, subtle, intuitive faculties begin to awaken.  An advanced yogi can see his/her own mind so deeply and study the relationship between mind and body.  One can feel how the subtle body along with the nervous system create impressions in the chitta.  One can see them arise and also see them dissolve.  All feelings, thoughts, memories, and desires are gradually understood.  By simply seeing these vortexes from a calm, neutral ‘I” in the center of experience, one begins to see the processes that influence the unconscious conditioning, as well as the conceptual evaluations and judgments that go into our self-created, mind-born notion of “I am.”  The interesting question is who is seeing the mind these deep states?  Ordinarily the ego doesn’t process “reality” from such deep states of mind.  Who are you in-between thoughts, or when you are so calm and secure that you don’t even need to waste energy thinking?  These states of detachment from the Sensory Mind create deep states of joy because one isn’t simply escaping the outside world but accessing the interior kingdoms of cosmic cognition.  Here we can see how very balanced practice of yoga naturally leads one to deep levels of philosophical and mystical, intuitive thinking.

6 - Dharana  Dharana is concentration on an object.  It is meditation on some form or concept that the mind can grasp.  Meditating on the form and color of the chakras is a form of dharana.  Meditating on mandalas and geometric forms gives a certain focus and concentration to the mind so that it can begin to understand even deeper, formless ideas.
So often one thinks that there is a great difference between empirical, sensory experience and thought.  However, when the power of thought is cultivated and pinnacled it attains a deeper level of intuitive experience that is in direct connection with the object of thought. For example, instead of thinking about a tree, the mind feels at one with a tree, feels it as a magnificent life force interacting with its environment.  One understands that it has certain qualities that can be used for healing even without knowledge of medicine.  This level of pinnacled thinking is much more unified with the object of thought than merely pondering abstractly in the same manner of the medieval philosophers that philosophized on the question of how many angels could dance on the tip of a needle.  Through dharana one begins to see into the world of ideas and know how ideas and the vrttis that support them are but creations of the mind.  By holding a thought form steady in the chitta, the Aham begins to see the essence so deeply that the feeling of “I am” becomes superfluous.  One begins to perceive the universe spontaneously and intuitively.  I have known yogis who could know discreet details of my past, things impossible for one to know except me, just by looking at my forehead.

7 - Dhyana    Dhyana is internal attention on the I-Witness.  It is important to remember that the practice of Tantra is ultimately not for the purpose of the attainment of objective understanding, as in Dharana.   Dharana is a tool to help develop Dhyana.  The ultimate aim of Tantric practice is to understand the inner, quiet, I-Witness and thereby liberate one from the vicissitudes of spiritual ignorance.  Dhyana is a constant flow of mind.  It is unperturbed by external thoughts or formations in the chitta.  The mind is passive, “empty”, as a Buddhist would say.  It is not thinking on nothing, but rather thinking on “no thing.”    At this stage of intuition, one begins to feel the cognitive bearing or spiritual force of the I-Witness upon the mind.  Consciousness is the nucleus of the mind and by conceiving the existence of Shiva deep within the inner “I”, the mind naturally flows into the Supreme Subjectivity of Brahma.  One can practice dharana on form, but its refinement is to recognize the fundamental Witness beyond the relative mediums of mind, of which form is a creation.  Much purification is needed to transmute the obstacles that arise in the mind.  Tantric meditation must also cultivate the emotional, affective life as well so that dhyana isn’t a dry, abstract process.  Both thought and feeling, cognition and affection, are cultivated and elevated in a manner that guides the mind into deeper interiority and Self awareness.  Only when all of the vortexes that have been activated by one’s past mental flow are understood and processed, is Dhyana ultimately perfected.

8 - Samadhi  As defined previously, samadhi is the experience of union with Shiva.  The microcosm that has cultivated itself with the first 7 practical steps will eventually experience samadhi.  Samadhi is the goal but it is also practice.  There are many levels of samadhi, each one corresponding to the raising of the kundalini to a particular chakra.  The kundalini or Kulkulkan is the energy of Shakti that dissolves all of the vortexes of the mind.  She created them and now she dissolves them as kundalini.  The kundalini is the force that ultimately “cleans” the chakras by vivifying them with Shakti so that they resonate harmoniously with the rest of the mind.  Without vrttis distorting the kosas creating thought dissipation and disintegration of the entire mind-chakra system, the mind feels unified, aligned, and congruent within itself and with the Macrocosmic Mind.  Samadhis at the lower chakras give access to the corresponding worlds or lokas of the Macrocosm.  Lokas are planes of being in the Macrocosm, just as kosas are planes of being within the microcosm.  By purifying the kosas through samadhi, one sees into the lokas of the Macrocosm and learns their secrets.  The succession of these samadhis depends on the degree to which Kulkulkan has risen into proximity with Hunab Ku, of how many concentric circles and vortexes this plumed serpent has devoured on his journey home.  Kundalini is the “fundamental negativity”, as Anandamurti termed it.  It is “negative” in the sense that it is a return force.  Shakti always returns to Shiva.  All things come from the Infinite, are sustained by It, and ultimately return to It, here and now.  Nirvikalpa samadhi is when all of the vrttis are purified and the plumed serpent of Kulkulkan rises into the nucleus of Hunab Ku, or Sahasrara chakra.

The practice of Rajadhiraja Yoga with its 8 steps varies in degrees according to the capacity of the initiate.  One should begin with Yama and Niyama and Asanas.  Once the mind and body are more finely tuned with these practices, one can begin the others.  Together they all convert physical energy into mental energy and then further convert mental energy into spiritual cognition.  The practice should develop with the capacity to make these conversions.  A person who doesn’t understand Yama and Niyama will only harm himself with Asanas as they may give one too much unbridled mental energy.  Many teachers of Asanas without an understanding of Yama and Niyama harm themselves and misguide others.  Similarly, even a balanced-minded beginner with a natural sense of ethics must advance in the intermediate steps before being capable of deep concentration that  pratyahara, dharana and dhyana require.   All of the steps gradually internalize the mind.  With the internalization of the mind and the accompanying degrees of refined thought and feeling, the mind passes through  progressively more subtle kosas, or closer concentric circles.  While it is true that the ultimate aim of meditation is to understand who one ultimately is beyond these orbits around the nucleus, the mind has to pass through these various objective planes of mental being.  The lokas which our kosas perceive were created by the involution of Shiva into creation and in evolution our work is to find a way through these orbits around the Hunab Ku as spiritually conscious microcosms guided intuitively by Brahma.  Each one of the kosas orients the mind to newer, transcendent levels of being and then guides it to progressively higher levels until one eventually transcends the all of mental vortexes connected with all of the mental levels.  In this process of transcendence there is a continual transformation and therefore re-modification of the definition of a concept of individuality.  One cannot intuit the presence of the Supreme Subjectivity when the mind is bound into the more external layers of mind.  Instead, one feels that the objective layers of mind above their current level is one’s subjective identity.  For example, a mind at the Anahata level of development (Intuitive Mind), may not entirely conceive of its pure subjective being as Shiva, instead its subjective feeling is rooted in the objective layer of mind directly above it; in this case, the Vishuddha-Causal Mind.  The Causal Mind is still an objective layer of mind, however it appears as a subjective being to the layers of mind beneath it.  When one reaches the causal level, one will then understand that what once seemed as the ultimate subjective reality is now an objective reality.  It is now objective because one now intuits a layer of subjective being that witnesses even the Causal Mind.  This progressive redefinition of the existential I-feeling continues until one arrives at the hub of the mind, the I-Witness, or Shiva. This process of successively redefining subjectivity according to progressively subtler levels of being that the mind operates on is termed manasphota- the “explosion” of mind into progressively higher levels of mind.  When the mind is refined to the extent that it explodes into the original substance of Consciousness or Shiva, the process is termed cetanasphota.  Manasphota and cetanasphota are the core processed involved in spiritual practice.  Whether one is struggling to purify the heart or concentrating on one’s higher cognitive faculties, these two processes of mental and consciousness expansion are occurring.

Nature has so perfectly designed the mind that via the unfolding of the vrttis mind is ultimately led beyond any form on bondage, into union with the godhead.  Dharma, the moral order of the universe conspires with its natural laws to bring all orbiting microcosms back into the conscious center in the Eternal Now.   Ultimately, Nature and Spirit are in coordinated harmony.  Recall that Nature is the result of the co-mingling of Shiva and Shakti and encompasses all of creation, including Mind.  Nature furthers all created beings by guiding them back into union with Shiva.  While discussing the Anahata chakra it was mentioned that human beings have acquired the level of Self awareness that endows them with free will and permits them to make independent choices.  We can follow the spiritual and moral conscience nature has endowed us with. We are also free to follow the impulses propelling us toward blind instinct.  It has already been mentioned that our negative actions create samskaras or reactions because the mind has moved contrary to its natural course.  However, is there a specific activity or practice one can adopt to conform one’s life and actions with Dharma, with Conscience?  Certainly, Nature is there to guide us every step of the way if we can only listen.  But what about the times when we can’t listen or if we haven’t yet learned to listen to our inner voice?  The human being that has reached the Anahata chakra has an intuition of the Infinite but is certainly not yet established there.  Therefore, the will is separate from the Cosmic will.  The world still seems “out there;” there still seem to be factors outside of oneself that determine reality; there is still a cleavage between self and other.  The world seems to be something one has to fear and contend with although one intuitively feels that there is a deeper harmony working to heal the conflicts between self and other, between inner and outer.

Sadhana is the use of all human resources- emotive, cognitive, and active- to conform the mind to the cosmic moral order that ultimately guides the mind beyond all bondages and suffering.  Sadhana must therefore be the most refined human expression in that is serves as the link between the finite and the infinite.  It must represent the apex of human intellect and intuition, the noblest emotions, and compassionate activity.  In fact, sadhana is spiritual life itself.  It is what makes one complete and fearless by providing the inspiration, wisdom and courage to struggle to transform one’s lower nature and further comprehend one’s deeper sense of being.

Sadhana should never be confused with, or degenerate to the level of religion, dogma, or social convention.  Rather, sadhana should reflect the very laws and essence of spiritual life. The purpose of sadhana is not to provide a ready-made construction of the definition of spiritual life.  Instead, spiritual practice offers rational tools to help the aspirant discover for oneself what his/her life means in relation to Spirit.  The Tantric aspirant should have an approach similar to that of an open-minded scientist or investigator that enjoys his/her work and loves the pursuit of knowledge.

This is the essence of Tantric meditation:  to provide an experiential practice in order to help the mind grow and develop. However, one should not confuse the technique with the entirety of sadhana itself.  The Tantric techniques of the repetition of mantras, breathing practices, visualizations and so forth are merely functionary tools for the expansion of mind.  It can be likened to the health practices for physical life.  Jogging, walking, eating properly, etc. improve the quality of one’s health, but the practices themselves don’t constitute entirely the notion of healthy living.  It is their practical benefits that improve the quality of life.  Similarly, the act of meditation and yoga postures, while being joyful in themselves, do not constitute the entirety of spiritual life. The practices offer a medium to reach a pinnacled state of consciousness where one can experience oneself more fully and discover spiritual truths directly. When one comes close to the Infinite, all intermediaries fall away.  This is not to negate the importance of spiritual practice, but rather to say it is a means to an end.  Certainly, a virtuous and humble being can develop spiritually over several lifetimes within the flow of Macrocosmic evolution without actually sitting down and meditating, breathing in a prescribed manner, and assuming certain physical postures, etc. However, Tantric meditation quickens the process of spiritual evolution tenfold and provides a powerful and dynamic impetus for continued development.
<a class="tag" href="https://diasp.de/tags/yoga">#yoga</a> <a class="tag" href="https://diasp.de/tags/tantra">#tantra</a> <a class="tag" href="https://diasp.de/tags/tantramaya">#tantramaya</a>

</div>
