---
title: Microvita and Tantra Maya - Introduction
tags: Microvita
comments: true
layout: post
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/microvita.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
This work was originally written as the final part of my first published work, A Name To The Nameless. I decided it was a little too divergent from the material of the main body of the work. I have therefore decided to publish it as a separate work. Included are some parts of A Name To The Nameless as an introduction to the current work about Microvita. The portions of A Name To The Nameless will help the reader to more easily understand the Microvita and Mentity treatise in part IV at the end of the book. Part IV can also be read independently. 

I was first introduced to the concept of Microvita in 1993. Anandamurti had just left his physical body a few years before. People hoped that he would have been able to expound further on this new, revolutionary subject that he only began to speak about in the last few years of his life. However, he was able to establish a certain theoretical framework for very intuitive minds to study. This theoretical base helps orient the inquisitive intellect in the right direction. According to the great Tantric preceptors, like Anandamurti, there are subtle methods and theoretical models, or pratima, that are created by very intuitive minds with the design of helping the conceptual and creative minds of the students to delve into the secrets of the intuitive mind. 
	
If it weren't for this theoretical structure, then the science of Tantra would be as loosely defined as any other experimental, shamanic system. Tantra undoubtedly has its pre-historic roots in practices akin to shamanism. It is said that the great Sadashiva systematized this very free, experimental, and non-centralized practice of pre-historic Tantra indigenous to the Indian sub-continent. Tantra then became a more methodical and systematic form of spiritual practice designed to expand the mind from the dullness of materialism and instinctuality. Throughout the ages the great sages have revived this ancient science, each in his or her peculiar way.  Anandamurti was a modern reformer of this Tantric tradition as well. He re-systematized these practices to make them more applicable to the modern, universal human culture. They are very subtle, yet sure and solid practices that anybody with a little discipline and spiritual awareness can begin to practice. For more advanced meditators he gave special types of meditation for the study of microvita. 
	
I have always been fascinated with the ideas of Microvita. I met some very developed yogis who had made some very great advances in these studies. Most successful were the most pure and spiritual meditators. Many of them didn't have complex, conceptual minds that could give a rational explanation to a physicist, for example. However, there were a few of them that did have this spiritual insight combined with a developed conceptual mind that could give a very clear and logical explanation to intellectuals conditioned to think with scientific methodology. All of these yogis influenced my thinking and my desire to know more. Knowledge of Microvita isn't essential for spiritual realization, just like knowing how to fix a car isn't necessary for one to drive a car. However, this science does have some very practical applications in the sciences and arts. Most importantly, is the understanding of how our deepest intelligence is really embedded in the Tao, the Macrocosmic Mind. 
	
I came to learn of the Tantra Maya practices in a very curious manner.  One summer I passed through very deep and intense meditations.   It was during the most intense and horrific times of the so-called “narco war” in Mexico. The terror only pushed our community further into our meditations to try to survive and mentally and spiritually process the absurdity of war. Taking the stance of warriors, we decided not to let anything affect our determination to continue with our spiritual lives. One day, while in deep, still silence, I started to see all kinds of images arise in my mind.  They intruded and interrupted the silence, formless and breathless. Awakening back into my discerning mind, I immediately recognized these thought forms as Mayan symbols.  While these symbols appeared I felt like there was some guide or professor explaining the deep significance of each of them- the pyramid, the seba tree, as well as many peculiar sounds and meditation mantras.  There were few images, but the explanations were so vast.  Perhaps these ideas only lasted a few moments but they were packed full of deep, meditative ideas.  I continued enjoying these inner sessions thinking that I was simply tapping into the store of collective memories, or akashik records.  Thinking that I had discovered some secret Mayan yoga, I told my daughter about them.  She laughed and said they were all practices that she had learned when she was 7 years old from her Mayan teacher, Quetzal Manik, or White Feather.  Around that same time we got word that Quetzal Manik had just passed away at over 110 years of age. 
	
Most people that have experiences like this fall into the error of thinking they are channeling some dead spirit.  One becomes a “shaman” and goes on pilgrimage to Palenque or Sedona. Through lack of an understanding of the deeper layers of mind, one thinks that one has become a medium.  Meditation is a technique to concentrate on the inner I-Witness behind all mental phenomenon.  Here is infinity and it is only in this inner bliss that the mind becomes free of all fetters.  Occult vision is definitely a fetter as seen from this point of view.  Instead of seeing the infinite One beyond the confines of the relative mind, one becomes enamored with interesting information that passes through the relative medium of mind.  Most egos can’t handle the information and end up going off on some kind of “spiritual” ego trip as they fall into the traps of name and fame at having achieved some “paranormal” ability. 
	
I have never looked for this knowledge. Whatever little understanding I think I have is only because my mind was quiet and free of intentionality when these experiences ocurred. My experiences with this information make more sense the less I think of this information as coming from a disembodied spirit.  Although I do feel a distinct presence, the experience comes across more as a “download” of information rather than some kind of dialogue with a deceased spirit, However, I don't totally reject the idea that something of that particular mind was present in these experiences.  Furthermore, the nature of this information was purely spiritual and was revealing certain universal laws of spirit instead of the idiosyncrasies .  There was no language describing these forms, just pure ideas.  These ideas comport very well with the Indian Tantra that I am more familiar with. 
	
I tell of this experience as a practical example of microvita. Microvita science is a science that can only be properly understood when the entire mind has become an object for the immortal Atman, the I-Witness of mind. It is only when there is this clarity of self-understanding ensconsed in the Supreme Subjectivity of the Atman that it is possible for one to see a little of the inner dynamics of heaven. Microvita science is something much more subtle than spiritism in that there is essentially no recognition of any spirit apart from the eternal spirit of Atman. All spirits are but sparks of the Atman. Only the Atman can understand its own creation. Atman is the Supreme Consciousness and Supreme Subjectivity who sees all events in all places of the universe. 
	
The Tantra Maya practices of Quetzal Manik are definitely Tantric in origin, as they are, in some aspects, identical to those of eastern forms of Tantra.  If one reads the Tibetan Tantric Texts one sees that they are basically transposed forms of Indian Tantra that influenced Tibetan Tantra.  Although each has their uniqueness, it is so easy to see that words and concepts for Brahma, Shiva, or Shiva were simply called "Shunya," or "Void" in Tibetan Tantra.  Quetzal Manik was definitely a theist, however he had a certain Buddhist mystique of not getting too caught up in names for what is so transcendentally vast and beyond our little conceptual minds.  For him, as for all Tantrics, spiritual realization is based on sadhana, or spiritual practice. 
	
In Indian Tantra, the active, dynamic definition of Spirit or Atman is called Shiva- the “great god.” The Mayan Tantrics call It "Hunab Ku," the Cosmic Nuclueus, the nucleus of all nuclei in the universe.   Spirits, or microcosmic minds, are termed “deva,” or gods.  Devas are sparks born out of the Shiva. They all radiate around the Cosmic Nucleus of Hunab Ku.  A deva refers to any microcosmic mind, embodied or disembodied, from ant to angel. All beings evolve back into oneness with the Shiva or Hunab Ku.  Just as all microcosmic minds in this planet make up the Gia, or Earth Mother, all of the microcosmic minds in the universe make up the Macrocosmic Mind, the Tao current that underlies and inter-weaves our deep, inner lives in a “dance of the blessed spirits.” This work is an attempt to explain such subtle, natural experiences in light of the rigorous philosophy and intuitive spiritual practices of Tantra. 
