---
title:  Microvita and Tantra Maya ch.3 "Life, Evolution and Microvita"
tags: Microvita
comments: true
layout: post
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/microvita.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
Any sincere spiritual seeker is satisfied with nothing less than the Infinite itself. Our quest for knowledge is infinite. When we discover a secret or hidden cause, we discover a chain of other questions that lead to yet undiscovered causes. And the further our knowledge ascends toward the spiritual, the summit of all knowledge, the more subtle and finer are the causes and the levels of mind to perceive them. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> There is really no end to the potential for the cultivation of our consciousness. The more pinnacled our perceptions the more we realize that our evolution has some goal or entelechy. Each new discovery in the form of pinnacled thought or heightned feeling seems to lead us toward something beyond itself until we reach a ground or foundation of knowledge; a Being that makes knowing possible. Each being or radiation out of this Infinite Consciousness bears its imprint, albeit in an objective and finite form. We see its imprint everywhere in created Nature and we hear its calling in the outer as well as the inner worlds. To the sensible and spiritually refined mind, all things speak of the infinite. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> All knowledge and experience is objectively oriented. We perceive things other than, that exist separated from a subject. In order for an act of knowing to occur, there must be a subject or knower, and an object, the known. When the subject is the intellect, the objects of knowledge are intellectual concepts. With the intellect there is always a sharp division between the subject and object, between the inner and outer worlds. When the subject is the intuitive faculties, then the objects of knowledge are intuitions. In intuition there is less division and separation; the subject and the object become mystically linked and intermingled. Intuition proceeds from, is an evolution out of the base of intellect. Each continually higher form of conceptualization is a refinement of the previous, just as intuition is a refinement of intellectual conception. The more intuitive a mind becomes the more it realizes itself as part of a greater whole and essence, a macrocosm that is both the subject and object. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Our microcosmic existence is but a miniature figure of an unlimited Macrocosmic Mind that contains, creates, preserves, and dissolves this entire universe. The rigid intellectual concepts of a disconnected subject and object of knowledge, as well as a separated isolated ego concept, break down when we realize that the entire universe is connected and alive, that all things flow into and inter penetrate each other. When we realize something "outside" of ourselves, we are really discovering a truth of the essence of the divine mind which contains us. Therefore, objective being is mind, and we understand more of being as we understand more of our minds. And the more we understand of mind the more we understand of being. Our lives in the form of microcosmic minds are in essence the Macrocosm in a state of becoming; a mind struggling to evolve its innate and infinite potentials that have their base in this Macrocosmic Mind. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Microvita are the finer, causal agents that function at subtle levels behind the manifestations of physical, empirical reality. It is impossible to discuss them without mentioning the theory of vrttis expounded in The Spiritual Heart. Simply stated, they can be likened to the traditional concepts of angels or spiritual beings that govern not just the physical world, but the psychic spheres and even the psycho-spiritual to some extent. Microvita is an intuitive concept. They do not come within the range of ordinary sensory experience, nor can they be grasped with sensory-intellectual concepts. Only a mind intuitively tuned with the finer vibrations and activities of the Macrocosmic Mind can begin to have an understanding of these entities. Because something is "intuitive" does not necessarily signify that it is beyond reason (non-rational) nor irrational (contradictory to reason). </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> It is not the case that the study of microvita necessitates the dethroning of reason to understand mystical realities. Rather than throwing out rationality, the development of the intuitive faculties extends the process of reason and logical thought beyond the empirical world. Anandamurti was a Tantric preceptor. He also emphasized that the way to realize the nature of microvita is through the practice of Tantra. The system of Tantric meditation taught by him emphasizes spiritual practice and personal realization as a base for metaphysical knowledge in place of pre-conceived ideas of institutionalized dogmas. In this manner, the practice of Tantra is more of a science than a religion or any pre-conceived ideological system. The methods of Tantric practice are logical and systematic without hindering or limiting intuitive refinement. In many religions and philosophies, the possibility of the knowledge of higher worlds is closed off by the preconception that our knowledge is limited only to the physical world. The manner to understand the mystical is through faith in an otherworldly reality or an after-life. While Tantric philosophy will admit the inability of the mind to fathom the nature of the Infinite Consciousness itself, Tantrics will uphold the view that it is possible to understand the causal and astral realms that produce physical reality. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Our lack of spiritual understandings make us believe that everything beyond the physical world must be part of some metaphysical reality and that everything from this line and above it the absolute realm of reality. In other words, the many levels of being above the sensory and intellectual realms of existence are simply lumped together in some sort of vague metaphysical absolute; a giant lump of cosmic jelly. Genuine spiritual research isn't so vague, however. One can realize that there are many levels or bands of reality beyond the physical with their own particular inhabiting beings or microvita. While it is true that they are all interconnected and interdependent, it is necessary to understand all the levels of within immensity of our being and their particular characteristics. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> There are seven main layers of mind or kosas. The grossest is the physical world and physical body. This is termed the Annamaya Kosa, the kosa or level composed of food. A little above that layer of physical being is the first level of mental being, the Kamamaya Kosa, the sensory mind. The sensory mind is but a vehicle to serve this physical body. Above the sensory mind is the sensory-intellectual mind, the Manomaya Kosa. Both of these levels of mind are particular to an individual mind. The sensory mind perceives and remembers sensory perceptions from the physical world and responds to them with its innate sensory desires and instincts(eat, sleep, reproduce, fear, etc.). The sensory-intellectual mind can reason and reflect upon the sensory perceptions instead of simply responding instinctually. It has the capacity to logically arrange sensory perceptions into the form of intellectual concepts. Both the sensory and sensory-intellectual minds are physically based: they are dependent on the physical body and brain for their function. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The kosas above these two personal or individualistic layers of mind are part of the collective mind. They are part of the causal or astral mind in which each individual mind participates. Just as the sensory-intellectual mind is more refined than its predecessor, the sensory mind, each level or kosa in the collective mind, or Macrocosmic Mind, represents a realm of being deeper, profounder, and more revealing of absolute Being. The Creative Mind or Atimanasa Kosa, meaning "beyond the intellectual mind(manas)", is the level of mind where one grasps the psychic form of an object. No longer is there a mere conceptual, intellectual understanding of an objective being, but the mind begins to perceive radiations or inferences from a more psychic level of being that is involved in the production of physical reality. Therefore, the Atimansa Kosa is the first layer of mind in which one realizes that all things are Mind. It is a creative idea that generates physical reality. Thoughts are not the empty shadows of a dead and isolated physical world. Instead, with the power of thought we are able to apprehend the creative, generative forces that go into the production of created nature. For example, there are many cases of great intellectual minds who after a lot of concentrated thinking on a theoretical issue suddenly arrived at the solution to their problem spontaneously, as if there was an underlying form to their concepts that their intellects were attempting to grasp. A more practical example might be of a person struggling to figure out why they are the way they are. "Why do I think, feel and act in such a manner? Who has all of this happened to?" At times this form of deep thinking breaks through into a form of intuition that spontaneously responds to the intellectual questions posed by the intellect. One understand a deeper meaning and has a connection to events that somehow give a form of comprehension the isolated, individual and fragmented experiences of the sensory and sensory-intellectual mind. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Just above the Creative mind or Atimanasa Kosa is the Intuitive Mind or Vijinanamaya Kosa. The Creative Mind is the beginning of the intuitive wholeness of higher understanding. It is what initially calls upon and inspires the intellect to think in deeper ways. Therefore, it is a midpoint between the grosser intellect and the purer, intuitional faculties. The Intuitive Mind, however, is capable of understanding higher realities directly through the experience of intuition. The mind connected with this kosa has a direct experience of phenomenon. Instead of merely perceiving and conceiving an outside object or being through the intellect or senses, ones mind is in fact at one with the object of thought. For example, instead of seeing a tree as a being separate from me through the vehicles of my senses and intellect, I realize that the tree is already an object within my mind. I may see it as a brother and know of its medicinal properties. Remember that the Intuitive Mind is part of the Macrocosmic Mind which is a unity in itself. My mind is now a part of the Macrocosm and the things I perceive and conceive are part of my very own being. Therefore, my knowledge of a being at this level is a result of my unity with it. For example, with the Creative Mind one may have an intuition about another being. One feels or intuits that a persona has a particular personal quality. There is a thought or hunch that this is so. With the Intuitive Mind, however, one is able to "see" directly into the mind of another and know more directly what are the qualities of another being. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Above the Intuitive Mind is the Causal Mind or Hiranyamaya Kosa. The Causal Mind is the root of the Macrocosmic Mind which is the whole. It is the Generator, Operator, and Dissolver (G.O.D.) of the created universe. It is entirely beyond the time factor and is capable of knowing all things past, present, and future. Here the mind resonates with the causal thoughts of the Macrocosmic Mind that create, maintain, and dissolve the universe. The Intuitive Mind apprehends the deep nature of reality but the Causal Mind creates the deep nature of reality. Being at the causal level, it is a realm of tremendous occult ability. The mind at this level has the potential for many subtle occult powers and even omniscience. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> There comes a point in our search for the hidden causes of phenomenon, however, when the mind itself becomes an object, even the Macrocosmic Mind. We realize that the mind with all of its faculties for thinking, feeling, intuiting, and acting, as well as the Macrocosmic, Causal Mind that contains this vast universe, is itself an object for a Supreme Subjectivity or Supreme Consciousness. Here one realizes that the Self is not in the mind or its relative faculties; not in the physical, psychic, nor even causal realms, but lies beyond in the eternal witnessing Knower of the Known. This infinite and eternal subject lies beyond the realm of time, space, and person. It is not modified by the changes of mind and perception, nor Creation, Operation and Dissolution, but quietly witnesses them in its eternal repose. This absolute layer of Being is called Satya Loka, or the Abode of Truth. It is the Supreme Consciousness itself. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> It is when we come near to the infinite that we realize that knowledge has this goal. We keep asking 'why' until the mind is no longer able to objectivize and perceive things outside of itself. The activity of the mind disappears in the essence, the knower of all knowledge. The Infinite cannot be known: it is the Knower of all things that can be known. The Upanishads state that to know Brahma(the Supreme Consciousness) one must become Brahma. This is the spiritual course and purpose of the path to knowledge: that eventually the mind begins to ask who is it that knows and begins to make the "I", the subject, the actual subject of investigation. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Hardly is the realization of Brahma the satisfaction of the abstract desire for infinite knowledge, but is a summation of what it means to be a human being who thinks and feels and acts. All of the fear and anxiety and suffering of being an entity separated and isolated from god, nature, and one's fellow beings is dissolved in this blissful realization. Brahma is the god of all knowledge. It is the source of all love and goodness the heart desires, as well as the creative inspiration for all ingenuous and ingenious activity. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> This book is about the subtle dynamics of the Macrocosmic Mind, the hidden and esoteric causes of phenomenal reality. In other words, it is a work of occult subjects and occult perceptions. This type of activity is only fruitful when one realizes the full spectrum of knowledge and that knowledge is not separated from the universal moral order or Dharma of Brahma. Only when we realize that all is from Brahma and are so intimately connected with Brahma is it mentally possible and prudent to begin to understand occult causality or Microvita. Tantric and Yogic lore warn time and time again of the dangers of occult perceptions and their ensuing powers of mind. It is only when one cares only for the realization of Brahma and is indifferent to the occult powers that one can truly understand the mysteries of causality. Therefore, only a mind that has been purified of its ambition of self-becoming, has the realization of the Supreme Consciousness, and endowed with universal love can really understand the ways of Brahma. </span></span>
