---
title: I am That? 
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
---
In ancient Indian Tantra Yoga the mental ideation or concentrated thought for the practice of meditation is taught as “I am That” or “I am Brahma.”  For the extroverted mind without intuition of the Supreme Subjectivity of the Atman it is quite necessary to use an objective mental concept like a mantra to refer to “That,” the mystery of mysteries, especially in the beginning.  Who understands silence and what lies embedded in the silence underneath the wavering, coquettish mind?  Without an objective, descriptive idea of the Supreme Subjectivity with the qualities of love, light, bliss, or even a personal being with human-like qualities, this contemplation of the Atman is impossible for most.  It is only when the mind has matured and internalized and understood the problems and complexes related with the personality and its external, social world and has developed intuition and self-reliance in spiritual and existential affairs that it is possible to begin to understand the Atman or Supreme Subjectivity as a “This” instead of a “That.”

After so much sincere practice, the sweetness of Om reveals the blissful essence of the Atman as the essence of one’s person.  Atman is inconceivable for the mind’s intellect and ego but is in no way “impersonal.”  The heart usually knows this simple truth well before it is so furtively and constantly churned away in the mind over so many lives and deaths.  Atman ultimately is revealed as what is most near and dear, closer to me even than my eyes or nose or hands.  Atman is within the very notion of “I exist,” It is the I-Witness.  Now, I only see, so “I am This” becomes a more natural form of ideation.

The mind is usually too involved in unresolved conflicts of the psyche and/or social world to be able to have this deep spiritual confidence and simply be Oneself.  This Atman, this “I-Witness” is far too close to be considered an object, a “that” or thing outside of Oneself.  Even the most refined concepts of divinity are but maps and references that refer to what is inconceivable for the mind.  Eventually we encounter subtle in-originalities, things acquired along the way that served quite a good purpose but no longer quite express our honest and direct truth.  Fine wine becomes vinegar some day.  In Ramakrishna’s experiences of samadhi he held on so firmly to the image of the Great Mother archetype until he finally had to shatter even this loving image to merge into the transcendental Atman beyond even broad-minded vibrantly charged religious concepts.  One fine morning the Zen master shatters his little Buddha figure.

“This” implies greater closeness and points deep within and cannot be confused with the image of the ego and its concepts that are witnessed from above by this Supreme Subjectivity.  The mind cannot distort this intuition because it cannot even grasp what is not idea, a “that”.  The Atman sees all but is not captured by what It sees.  The Atman, contemplated in peace and silence, totally consumes the whole notion of “I am,” much less any idea like “I am a Buddhist,” “I am a Christian,” or what have you. This notion of ego, of “I am” is the progeny of the Atman.  After sporting about in all orbits of time and space for eons, mind always finds its nucleus as an immortal and ineffable Witness.  Older than all stories ever told, only the Atman’s perspective gives a positive reference for our persons in a fleeting and ephemeral world.  “Yes, I have been with you all along, has there ever been anything meaningless?”, is the voice we  all long to hear.  Atman then dissolves and liberates the mind like a spider who in some strange manner recovers and consumes its own Self-spun web.



