---
title: Memory
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
layout: post
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/Chandranath.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="Chandranath and Ram Parit Devii" cols=3 %}
Memory is the capacity to recall events that have already happened. A poor
memory is like shifting sand and can’t even remember what truly
happened. It is like a liar that actually begins to believe and narrate lies to
the extent that they are not even remembered as lies. A good memory is
honest and remembers every thought and emotion, whether the most
sublime and divine or the most dark. But what happens when we try to
recall events where all thought disappear, these moments of illumination
when there is no doubt, no fear, no argument and you are as you truly are?

When I sat next to Chandranath and tried to listen to him speak of the
Supreme Consciousness I could not understand a word he said. He took me
into himself and there was only silence and a soft. white glow. I still try to
recall that experience and become so still, forget even breathing, and there
is still only silence and a soft, white glow.

The divine faculty of memory is so often hijacked by the ego and exploited
to its end. When sad, all of the memories of one life become sad. When
sure and confident, well things just weren’t really all that bad now were
they? We remember what we want to remember according to our current
state of war with the eternal presence, the great enemy of the ego. The
ever present “I-Witness” is always trying to make us remember who we
really are by shattering all of our illusions and projections about reality.
When the memory is pure and light and not ridden by guilt or sin, we see its
true purpose: a truly personal reflection and commentary on the nameless
One. When life becomes free and innocent, One has always been Oneself.
Name and my form were just expressions, ornamentations, and attempts to
be truly at one with oneself. There is only one existence in all of us, and at
all times in our apparently separate incarnations.

People like Chandranath have set a practical example of how a realized yogi
can live in the world. It seems miraculous, perhaps even absurd, that the
human mind can unite with the Supreme Consciousness. We can truly say
“I am This” from the most sincere and complete part of our beings.
However, it seems even more miraculous the benevolent grace that
emanates from such a realized being and their ability to transform others.
He seemed to me a man so simple and pure and I never felt that he was
asking anything from me; he only gave himself wholeheartedly to anybody
seeking guidance. For a yogi who practices samadhi regularly, such a
conscious and humane expression like Chandranath is the most natural and
simple creation of the Supreme Consciousness. When the microcosmic
mind dissolves into the Supreme Consciousness, there is really no ego, nor
even I-feeling, that binds one to the relative plane. Many yogis leave their
bodies after such experiences. Others, like Chandranath, mysteriously
returned to the relative plane of earthly existence and continued to serve
others. I think that when when one enters the breathless state of samadhi
and dissolves completely into the Supreme Consciousness, then it is only
this One that can breathe the breath back into this unified yogi. If it weren't
for people like Chandranath, his wife, Ammachi and Chidghananda, who
really set such a practical ideal, then I probably would have thought that
such beings existed only in the distant past, in legends, and that the
modern world is no longer habitable for advanced yogis. In the most
mystical and subtle ways, people like Chandranath leave an undying
imprint on the people they affect, and therefore leave their mark on the
collective consciousness of humanity as a whole. A friend of mine,
Devashish Donald Acosta, wrote a book based on his interviews with
Chandranath titled “When the Time Comes.”


