---
title: The Fundamental Negativity
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
layout: post
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/cobra.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
According to our Headkick Headtrick Tantra, the kundalini is the fundamental creative force in the universe and not just a subtle force that functions in the physical microcosmic organism. Anandamurti termed the kundalini the “fundamental negativity.” It is “negative” in that it is the return force that can recover even the most furthest centrifugal force away from the cosmic nucleus. Kundalini, as it functions in the microcosm, doesn’t take one further away from the cosmic nucleus, rather it is the fundamental force that is capable of returning all of our mental creation to its origin. No matter how far our creation has materialized from spirit into matter, and no matter how far we have lost ourselves in illusion, desire, or ignorance, the Mother Shakti as kundalini will take us home. 

Kundalini is the Shakti or energy of Shiva, the Supreme Consciousness. When she goes out from Shiva, there is creation, or involution. When she comes back there is evolution and eventually enlightenment.
When spoken of in her microcosmic manifestation as the kundalini, she is said to be sleeping dormant at the base of the spine in the muladhara chakra. This position represents matter, the crudest manifestation of spirit and furthest away from the point of Shiva in the crown. Because she is the fundamental energy behind all expressed energies she has the capacity to control all forms of energy. This is why it is said that due to the awakening of this force through spiritual practice, all kinds of mysterious phenomenon occur. One can concentrate for extended periods of time, have tremendous mental and physical vigor, open latent psychic and occult potentialities, and achieve elevated states of spiritual awareness.

The awakening of the kundalini should be prepared by a moral base, through having attained some living practical wisdom of how to live without creating unnecessary suffering for oneself and others. Only those a little more advanced on this path are candidates for entering this path. Although it is possible to awaken this force through psychedelics, through intense, forced physical yoga practices like asanas and pranayama, and other rituals, these practices are incomplete by themselves and can be dangerous in in that they lack proper psychological preparation for this bombardment of cosmic consciousness. At most these practices may force the kundalini to the second chakra and try to prematurely process the latent tendencies in the sub-conscious mind. After such an exhilarating experience, one becomes overwhelmed by the sub-conscious complexes of the mind. Insecurity, deeply-rooted fears, compulsions, and paranoia are common side-effects of the premature awakening of kundalini without proper ideational preparation via deep and mature meditation, which of course requires a very high degree of moral discernment. Although one almost never ever meets a yoga teacher that has awakened the kundalini, this mysticism is the very basis of the practice of yoga. Modern society only gets what it deserves, Barbie Yoga.
The greatest test is to bring the kundalini through the Knot of Brahma at the navel, or manipura chakra. It is here that one must contend with the 10-headed serpent who controls shame, slander, jealousy, laziness, sadness, sadism, infatuation, ambition, hatred, and fear. Due to deep progress in meditation and a deeply mindful existence one has become ready to tackle the underlying ambitions of the separate ego, that although subsided, still have plenty of force to make a mess of your life. Once the kundalini rises here, the underlying aggressions, ambitions, fears, and shame of the ego become all too apparent. It is like trying to pay off a huge debt in a very short time. Most would prefer to pay it slowly.

I recently dreamed of Anandamurti in which he was explaining to me that through the current electromagnetic conditions of the planet, the collective consciousness was being prepared to purify the sub-conscious and creative minds (2nd and 3rd chakras). The evolutionary aim is to permit more human beings to awaken the intuitive mind at the heart. The majority of human beings live only in the sensory mind and the lower parts of the intellectual mind. What is happening now is that the 3rd chakra is being so powerfully purged that the collective mind will either go insane or take refuge in higher ground. This cleansing of the creative mind in humanity will allow a little more energy to enter into the intuitive mind, or anahata chakra. We will still be, at least as a collective mind, evolving and passing through the subtle laws that govern the creative mind so that we can slowly gain access to the intuitive mind.
While the awakening of the kundalini to the anahata chakra is not the ultimate aim of spiritual evolution, is is a safe ground in which the “raging bundle of desire in a dying animal” has quieted.
The intuitive mind is related with the so called “aerial factor”. This “air” is of course a most refined form of matter. If the involution of consciousness into matter is a process of Macrocosmic thought converting itself into matter, then the aerial factor is a little closer to the thought end of the spectrum. It is here that the mind moves beyond form. There is immediate insight or intuition into the nature of things- oneself, others, nature, and the cosmos. One’s sense of dignity at being a universal citizen of pure being overcomes all the limitations of vanity and self-importance that the separate ego feeds off of.
With the awakening of the intuitive mind, one really begins to see clearly how there is but one life in the universe, that all microcosms pertain to the macrocosm. Thought waves that arise here collapse into matter, into form. One sees how the secrets of spiritual thought and pure feeling convert themselves into material creation. Existence is but a crystallization of these subtle impressions that manifest themselves from the Cosmic Mind of which you are now a part of. Awakening the kundalini here brings a supernova explosion of energy to the heart that explodes and projects your most noble intentions out into the entire universe. It is vital that there are yogis and tantrics that are pursuing this endeavor, thus clearing the path a little and preparing the way for others.
What is most important in meditation is sincere effort. One rarely thinks that the victories in your private arena have something to do with the evolution of a planet, but they really, really do.
