---
layout: post
title: Psorax
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/psorax.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
Anybody who has looked into the abyss of his or her consciousness knows that the
abyss looks back at you, as Nietzche said. The unconscious mind is a very live and
active zoo of escaped animals raging about in pure chaos and savagery. Does
their years of pent-up frustration make them even more crazy when they finally
escape? And in all of this unintelligible impulse speaks back from the chasm some
kind of insidious intelligence. In modern psychology, this hidden intentionality has
been called the id, the shadow, or the unconscious. 

Pluma Blanca called this
entity “psorax”. His definition of this entity of the unconscious is much more
mystical and profound than any other explanation that I know. It is more of a
practical understanding of how the mind creates frustrated realities that remain
trapped within one, like an itch under the skin. He called it psorax because he saw
it as the vital, pranic energy that becomes contaminated and gets trapped behind
the skin, in the physical body. This blocked vitality distorts the body’s natural
functions and may accumulate like a festering sore attracting more mental
parasites like itself to itself, thus making a hodge-podge stew of evil and illness.
This idea makes more sense when one understands deeply the relation between
the mind and the body and how prana, or vital energy moves between them.
Psorax is a trapped energy, a mental plasm that can’t effectively project itself
outwardly as it would like to. Each time it does it becomes even more frustrated. It
has the intelligence of mind behind it, but the frustrated intentionality toward
matter, or the physical body pulling upon it. This is the reason that by living with
false ideas about oneself or the world is the greatest danger of conscious, human
existence. Materialism is the greatest of deprivations as it destroys the mind
slowly but surely. Not having this clarity and responsibility of how each one of us
is a co-creator in this creation always leads to a fall. Psorax is a psycho-physical
entity that in some ways is self-created by the individual while at the same time is
aided by the fact that there are exchanges between these entities of psorax
between human beings, or minds incarnated in physical human bodies. One can
receive as well as transmit this psychic virus in much the same way that one
receives and transmits physical viruses.
A practical example: you are at peace. There are only a few light, positive
thoughts in the mind and some pleasant feelings. Behind this subtle activity of
mind is a deep, mysterious witness that just pleasantly is. Out of nowhere, it
seems, there enters a dark, violent image on the mental scene. Is it my own
unconscious attacking my peace, or is it because another person has come near
and I sense his suffering? If I’m not at peace, then I may never understand and
just get locked into a reception and transmission of negativity. This seed wants to
take root within me, it vibrates my body and perhaps excites some memories and
fears. It wants to become one with me. Only from a state of deep calm and non-
judgement one can begin to witness these activities; how they affect the mind,
change the feelings, and even how and where these influences vibrate and take
root in the physical body. Most importantly is to distinguish your’s from another’s
psorax. Pluma Blanca was an advanced yogi as well as a healer, and used his
pinnacled knowledge to observe these phenomenon, how they create physical
and mental illness, and developed ways of curing these ailments based on this
understanding.
Deep, sincere meditation is of course the most effective manner of seeing and
processing the shadow, but this depends on so much: mental health, physical
health, determination and discernment that are only developed by ardent efforts
in one’s spiritual life. In yoga, yama and niyama is the base of this practice. This
practical morality imparts self awareness and practical universal ideas of how to
maintain mental balance through proper personal and social responsibility.
Without these fundamental ideas of humanism imparted to individuals one is but
a mix of animal impulses and social determination, or a game of Russian roulette.
A society without spiritual principles that foster ethical awareness is but a vehicle
for destructive, unconscious forces where psorax takes all into the abyss. I think
this is why Pluma Blanca lived in a cave and only taught a few good people.
Anandamurti, on the other hand, impulsed others to fight within society against
the depraving effects of what he termed “negative microvita”. Both are right
according to who they were, where they were, and what they expressed as
enlightened individuals. Its not enough to believe and conceptualize about such
things. Beliefs and opinions give rise to superstition and dogmas about ghosts,
hauntings, and possessions, and the like. Without the efforts of both of these men
who spoke about these phenomenon in the most practical and scientific manner
possible to speak of such phenomenon, I know that I would be even more in the
dark about understanding negative microvita or psorax, and perhaps be yapping
about the devil and hell-fire and salvation.

<a class="tag" href="https://diasp.de/tags/tantramaya">#tantramaya</a>

</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
