---
layout: post
title: To The Saints
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
---
There are still living some very great yogis that so beautifully reflect the influence of the grace that Anandamurti showered on his closest disciples. A great master like Anandamurti could heal any disease, physical or mental because he could see the subtle causes deep in the mind and also because he had infinite love. Being close to his closest disciples was the greatest blessing of my life and I owe everything to those sincere beings that have sacrificed their lives for the work of dharma. I met some who reflected their guru's compassion so deeply that they began to take on the negative samskaras or karmic reactions of others so that those struggling could develop in their practices and become strong themselves. It is not that they will this, rather, it is that because of their own spiritual freedom and compassionate realization, the Macrocosmic Mind may express this grace through them. People of this category are the most valuable people in human society. Their sole duty on this planet is to help others and maintain the balance of dharma. Some of them are very ill as they are aging and their physical bodies no longer have the energy to burn off the samskaras of others. Despite the fact that so many of their fellow disciples are falling from the path and have only plagued and bogged them down with their deviant expressions, these noble few are still keeping the mission of dharma alive and vibrant. Without these beacons of hope, the work of Anandamurti would indeed be lost. Everything I have said and done against those whom I believe are only harming their work was of my own planning and doing. My only intention has been to reveal the hypocrites, criminals, and spiritual power-mongers that are causing so much harm to their spiritual society and the legacy of Anandamurti.


