---
layout: post
title: The New Humanity 
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
---
I feel certain that the solution to the electromagnetic imbalances that are so greatly affecting the collective consciousness of the planet is quite simple and clear: take refuge in a higher ground. This planet maintains a balance with gravitational and electromagnetic forces by which our consciousness, a complex process involving the glandular and nervous system as well as the mind and Consciousness, has evolved and adapted over millions of years. Despite the fact that many people are having some severe problems of maladaptation to these new conditions, there is a great potential to make some huge leaps in personal and collective awareness.

While contemplating the effect of the increase of solar activity and its effect on the earth’s magnetic field I find my mind always returning to the idea that all forces in this manifested universe are but the result of three fundamental forces; the positive, the negative, and the neutral; or the centrifugal, the centripetal and the neutral. There appears to be an extreme bipolar tendency in the collective mind. Almost everybody I know is in some sort of emotional and/or existential crisis. If not crisis, then at least a great challenge that requires tremendous effort to maintain equilibrium and keep moving forward. Nobody I know has it easy these days. These forces are external to our Consciousness, our Atman, but appear to affect us because our minds are incarnated in physical bodies with sensitive organs that are affected by electromagnetic fields. Due to this adjustment there are many subtle imbalances in the nervous and glandular systems that are altering how the mind thinks, feels and perceives reality. However, meditation and spiritual practice have the reverse affect. The Atman as the nucleus of consciousness vibrates the contemplative, meditative mind with eternal peace and clarity and the mind thereby vibrates the nervous system with this much needed balm of soothing alleviation that puts our physical being back into balance.
While the centripetal and centrifugal forces are fighting out their eternal game of clash and cohesion, the neutral force has the capacity to balance them out, take them into the nucleus of awareness and find a higher synthesis. But where is one to find this neutralizing force, this mediator of the centripetal and centrifugal forces that dominate the physical universe? The neutral force, the equalizing force is to be found not in extroversion or introversion, nor action or inaction, attraction nor repulsion, but in deep attention and presence of these plays of the mind. It is the One presence behind each and every microcosmic mind that maintains the balance of the entire Macrocosm. The entire universe has been, is being, and will always be directed by the One who directs all duality. If you want to bring the mind and emotions into balance it is only through awareness of this blissful entity that this play of forces may take refuge in the eternal repose of the Atman. As Anandamurti said, “the force that guides the stars guides you too.” Perhaps we are in a leap, a shift in evolution which is always and extreme and violent act, but I cannot deny that it is all so beautiful, and behind the apparent chaos and imbalance lies a greater, hidden agenda that only the mind devoted to its source and origin can understand.
This energetic situation will only become more intense until we as a species, a collective consciousness, begin to understand this truth and cultivate a planetary culture which fosters this awareness. So many are falling into emotional imbalances and addictions. We go up too high and then we fall too low. We try to fix the lows with a high and are incessantly chasing our tails in a circle. Really, there is only One solution, and I hope that you all may truly be here to presence it and be part of a new, awakening humanity. Take shelter only in the loving, constant witness of the Atman, or the combativeness forces of nature shall rip thy mind apart like a gang of angry pit-bulls.
