---
title: The Elite 
tags: [Social Tantra]
---
My mother once told me of an incident when she was with her mother in a grocery store in Alabama in the early sixties. They arrived at the end of the check-out line. The people waiting in front of them were all black ladies who were waiting for their turn to pay at the register. As convention would have it, the ladies left their position and tried to get behind my grandmother at the end of the line. My grandmother wouldn’t let them. She said that they were there first and that they should go ahead of her. The other white people were offended by this. What is another white person coming in here for and breaking the rules of our established order?, they said. This happened in the early sixties before the Civil Rights Movement.

In the 90‘s I lived in a spiritual community in rural Missouri where many members were from India. The locals would come and shoot their rifles at us, try to burn down our buildings and shout “Sand Niggers!” (which is actually a racist term for Arabs, but what does a hick know?) We would call the police because the attacks came almost nightly. They said they would patrol the area. The attacks didn’t stop, they just never happened on the nights the police came. I had never heard of Ferguson before recently. It may have been very near where we were, or at least very near in mentality. Without the protection of the local government, we had no other alternative but to defend ourselves. There was debate in our community over whether we should have a gun. I even caught one monk making a Molotov cocktail in the garage. I argued with him about it even though I internally thought it was so hilarious to actually see him doing something so crazy. In the end, we ended up working together making booby traps like falling logs with spikes that would fall and puncture their tires when they entered. Let us have fun, non-violently, I argued. I suggested throwing rocks, but at their trucks. I would climb high in a tree and throw rocks into the beds of their trucks. Them stupid hicks had no idea where it was coming from and thought we were shooting at them. I once caught a truck load of them in one of our traps and shined the lights on them. They were terrified. They hadn’t been so frightened since that time their meth lab exploded. Every one of them had a mullet, except for the bald guy with a swastika tattooed on his scalp. On another occasion, we trapped the entire front-line of the varsity football team inside the gates, all five of them seated together and aligned in the front seat just like on the football field. They accused us of firing a rifle at them a week before. They asked me if I knew of the incident. I said that I only heard some people shouting “Sand Niggers.” I asked them if the “shooting” happened before or after the shouting. One said “before”, then his identical twin brother, the big, dumb center, looked confused and tried to cover for him by saying “after.” The quarterback, the smart one, then said, “we didn’t say that!” We really only gave them a good scare and a few dents in their truck. It was all pure and innocent fun on my part.
It was easy for me to laugh at their ignorance and I found it ironic that I lived in a community where these brutes actually came to burn a cross in our yard. However, I am a white boy who has never suffered these abuses personally and who is only just beginning to understand how detrimental these negative sentiments toward others truly are. If one understands racism, and sees how prevailing these attitudes are over the entire planet, then its no longer such a funny matter.

I live in Mexico and am married to an indigenous Mexican woman. I would have never imagined the racism that we would encounter. We once lived in a very elite area. I soon discovered that the Mexican elite are almost all of European descent. It is simply amazing to see how these blood-lines have remained unmixed over so many centuries. It was just like being in the United States. Many people there spoke English as well as the average American. I could have fit in if I wanted to, but there weren’t so many interesting people. Many people assumed that my wife was my servant. Only our friends accepted us being together, and many people who we thought were our friends really were prejudiced against us. I wasn’t personally offended but just accepted the fact that our circle of true friends was just a little smaller but dearer.
This experience showed me how damaging racism truly is. Victims of racism have deep scars that are difficult to overcome. Entire societies carry these wounds for centuries, even for milennia. I could see that this elite Mexican society, although much prettier than my Missouri hillbillys, were often just as ugly in their mentality. They both have very exclusive breeding circles and value being white over all else. These elite at least can buy a lot of cocaine instead of having to make their own crystal-meth. Living near these rich people made me think of the Old South in the U.S., South Africa and the old colonial attitudes. I read in BBC a few years ago that Mexico is the country that has the greatest gap between the rich and the poor. Only through the greatest corruption and exploitation is that possible. We were close to the people who influence society and decide its policies and met people who work in the government and for big corporations. The higher you go, the dirtier it gets was always what I heard in their confessions. It is so painful to think that these superficial yet insidious people have formed so much of the modern world and that their racist ideologies are still very much alive. It is the same situation all over the world. Imperialists have always had to kill off or at least totally paralyze the cultures of the indigenous all over the world to steal their lands and resources. The British were the first global narco-traffickers who took down China with opium. Europeans still use corrupt African regimes to create instability to divide and conquer economically, while Canada and the United States continue using Latin American bureaucrats and their police and military forces to steal whatever they want, from whomever they want and anywhere they want it. So that a few can live in opulence, the majority are condemned to live in rank poverty. Imperialism makes the world of the exploited a living hell. However, these shrewd parasites can never escape their conscience, no matter how dormant or distorted it is. They may make, manipulate, or distort social laws, but will never escape natural law. As a natural, mental reaction to their attitudes, the elite and their supporters hate themselves for all they have done. A part of them is aware of what they are doing but project their self-hatred onto others through racism to try to justify it all. The more they transgress, the more they are punished with self-hatred and the more they need to send it somewhere and find a scape-goat. They have already sold their souls for bad ideology to intellectually justify their base desires. These “ideological” mental traps only make them more psychotic. Nobody escapes the law of karma and it eventually all comes back upon us. We accept societies lies and abide by them. Maybe we don’t pull the trigger personally but our conventional attitudes and social and ecological ignorance permit it. Anybody with a sensible consciousness in the “first world” can see that our society for the most part has become a total failure and is already consuming itself in its own entropy. Much of modern human society is something the Gia, our live and sensible planet, no longer needs and no longer wants.

Narcissism is the soul killer. Most people don’t understand that the mind is a living, conscious entity that can be destroyed by reckless, ultimately meaningless, materialistic actions. Mind is a subtle entity that exists between the body and Consciousness. We live in such artificiality and crudity that we forget we have something really vital within. Our mental and soul architecture is designed to evolve, but can also degrade. If the mental plasma of the mind vibrates too much toward matter and a narcissistic ego image, this mental plasma becomes more crude like matter, which creates a state of entropy and involution. Such a mind invites energetic parasites in the form of “negative” microvita. Negative microvita are like termites to the mental structure and only help the unfit, distorted mind to destroy itself more quickly. They can be thought of as mental-energetic viruses. These mental parasites come in the form of physical and mental illnesses, uncontrollable compulsions, and extremely distorted thought patterns. They are but archetypal patterns in our collective consciousness that are activated by our resonance with the thought forms that they help to project within us. These thought forms have a particular resonance with our bio-psychological system of glands, hormones, and neurotransmitters. Ask anyone who has ever fallen into the dark side of the soul but has been fortunate enough to return. There is always some kind of guiding pattern that really helps one work against ones well-being; a perfect path to destruction and disintegration of the personality. The more one resonates with this unconscious actuality, the more it becomes a conscious reality. Of course, “positive” microvita also exist and have the same archetypal guiding function, but in the reverse, growth-oriented way. They bring us to greater awareness and help resolve the conflicts due to the negative microvita patterns in our minds. They impose a greater, more conscious and humane form on the old, negative archetypes of consciousness.

So much of the elite, the shrewd, the cultured, don’t even know how to live well and are truly without culture. Not just the upper elite, but much of the upper middle-class and “new rich” have similar attitudes. People live mostly by forms and images that aren’t their own. These socialites lack real, authentic identity, and their inner “I” feeling is so inter-twined with their swindled possessions, property and their shady, exploitive activities that the human being inside becomes ill. Their consciousness has been converted into a sick mind that only desires matter and narcissistic pleasure. The underlying paranoia of the separate, superficial ego begins to make the mind even more desperate to satiate itself. This stress wreaks hell and havoc upon the nervous system and the organs because the body was never meant to be the temple of unending, unlimited indulgence. They are condemned to solitude, as narcissists can never love. Instead, they become ill, physically, mentally, and spiritually. These degenerated patterns in the mind fortify themselves and become negative archetypes for all who think and feel in the same manner. There remains almost nothing to their character other than some warped conventional attitudes and a superficial mental form adorning an underlying brute instinct. The materialistic ideas of capitalism as well as communism and the very limited mental structures that have projected these materialistic ideas are but termite-ridden homes. When these ideologies guide the mind, then the whole society becomes mentally imbalanced. The collective human consciousness begins to degrade. A human being cannot live without a natural human spirit that seeks a greater understanding of the universe. I think it was Maslow who said “the normal in society is the psychopathology of the average.” Welcome to the Zombie Apocalypse.

Around where we lived in the north of Mexico, most men are alcoholics. The economically privileged go to prostitutes and their “gentleman’s” clubs and indulge in cocaine and alcohol while the women divert themselves with shopping trips to the U.S. and secret rendezvous with their lovers. My wife once had a patient with pancreatic cancer. He was a rich businessman with some practical intelligence but a very mundane, hedonistic life-style. Through strict discipline that he followed, she eventually cured him from what his doctors said was fatal. Elated, he went to Las Vegas to celebrate. His cancer came back and he died a few weeks later. On the day that was to be his last, he sensed the end was near and summoned all of his energy to be able to go out for one final steak dinner. At least I can say he was congruent with his ideology to the very end!
Humans who didn’t learn enough about their own humanity create families that are like mental institutions. Children are emotionally abandoned and completely vulnerable to all of the pseudo-cultural influences and vices. Drug and alcohol addiction is about the same as those in the poor barrios. Oh if only they were destroying just themselves in the process! However, these parasites accumulate everything but only let it rot in their coffers while destroying whoever gets in their way. They really set the precedent for the rest of the corrupt, shallow, mean-minded materialistic society that envies and follows their example. But who really wants to hear all of this? There are bills to pay and things to buy and so many lies to tell.

In the last few years here in Mexico I have seen things that I can hardly talk about with myself and my closest friends. I had to make sure the dogs were very well fed because of all of the human carnage in the near-by mountains. Mass graves became too much work. Later, they just started dumping the bodies by the road-side. However, I know there is a greater eye that sees all of this and can put it into perspective. I have seen remarkable examples of heroic resistance to this terror from the most simple and faithful people who inspire me.
A lady in a local village ran out of her home during a drive-by shooting against her family. She ran straight toward the assailants shouting “Baba Nam Kevalam,” a mantra that means “there is only love.” She rushed upon them and took the gun out of the hands of the teen-age assassin. They had never encountered such fearlessness and were simply stunned. We have lived through hell here in Buchenvald, Mexico. But these are passing, human affairs. And what is humanity but a passing affair? The earth is still alive and is really about to show us as such. “Those who protect dharma are protected by dharma.” The only time I have ever feared losing my life was in a state of spiritual emotion when I was so overpowered by an inner joy that I thought it would sweep me off into the Infinite before being able to see the full awakening of the Sixth Sun and the return of “Mexico Indio.”
