---
title: The Tree Tantra 
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

In the Tantra that I learned, Raja Di Raja Yoga, the techniques were very effective in awakening the kundalini. I began to enter the breathless state of samadhi very regularly when I was 23 years old. Although very intense, the practices gave the mind and body the maximum amount of transformation biologically, psychologically, and spiritually possible. <!--more-->However, nobody ever effectively taught me how to bring the kundalini back down. For years I was like a machine working at accelerated capacity. Sometimes I would go into trances while driving and my friend would have to grab the wheel. I would sometimes fall down and swoon while in a spiritual mood. My body once leaped 2 feet into the air when the kundalini awakened while I was sitting in the lotus posture. I cannot jump anywhere near that high in lotus if I try with my best effort and even when using my knees to bounce. This constant rising of the kundalini in me effected others as well, mostly for the good, but also negatively as well.

I was immediately rejected from my yoga society after people knew I was having these experiences. I was told on several occasions by several monastics that I wanted those high samadhi states of realization, then I was in the wrong organization. At first I thought this was absurd. I had only done the practices that they had taught me. Samadhi, spiritual trance, is supposed to happen when the kundalini awakens after sincere practice. It would probably have been alright with them if they had these experiences. Many talked about my experiences much more than I ever did within their gossip circles. They finally admitted my experiences were real, but said that I would die before age 40 because of their intensity. Far from being a complement, they also wished more mundane misfortunes on me as well! I felt like I was the lowest creature on the planet for a little while. While receiving divine bliss on the inside, I received so much hatred from without. There was absolutely no possibility of developing an inflated ego out of these experiences because I was constantly negated by the slanderous talk about me. Later, I did realize that I was in the wrong society. I knew I wasn’t perfect but I wasn’t the narcissistic person that they made me out to be. “What Peter says about Paul says more about Peter than it does about Paul,” I realized. I left these practices entirely. The people who taught me them hated me with such intensity that I felt tremendous pain in my head each time I tried to meditate with their system. It was as if they had suspended my access to Spirit through their channels. Fine, that gave me an opportunity to find out what Tantra is really like, independent of dogmatic religious groups. However, I have always held great reverence to the  teachers that I met who really understood their own practices. If I would not have met these few exceptions, then I would consider my time with this society as a prison sentence.

I left the shelter of a spiritual society without knowing how to bring the kundalini back down, or at least to not be so intense and to remember that this process will probably kill me if it doesn’t calm down. My renunciation of this society was a great blessing, afterall. I realized that people liked me again, despite that I had these strange phenomenon occurring within me. I always felt liked and accepted for most of my existence and I feel that this social acceptance gave me the confidence to be okay with myself and begin to explore new territories of inner being. I felt more at home in a hardware store than in a closed-minded spiritual society.

My meditation experiences came back with even more intensity and originality. I gradually developed my own system of practice. Throughout these years I never stopped having dreams of Anandamurti in which he always told me very interesting clues. He never gave anything away, but rather just guided me towards the understanding of spiritual practice. I realized that I didn’t even need to meditate anymore but that Anandamurti continued to give me experiences that would deepen my understanding of meditation. It has been a great adventure.

During this time, I became friends with Pluma Blanca, a Mayan yogi from Campeche. On our first meetings he shared his insights about the Tree Tantra. He always sat in meditation under the ceiba tree. It reminded me of how Anandamurti said that it is good to meditate under the neem tree.

One takes the tree as a symbol for meditation while at the same time taking actual shelter under the tree and participating with its shield of electromagnetic<wbr /> energy while meditating.  According to Mayan mystics "nothing evil can happen while under the ceiba."  The upward force growing out of the earth helps awaken the kundalini while the downward force of converting air into mass and developing deep roots into the earth helps bring the kundalini back down. Mind must fly upward toward the spirit but also must return to the earth, at least for as long as one is on this earth. Just like the Indian Yogis, Pluma Blanca said that a yogi completes his spiritual practice by bringing the kundalini back down, from the crown and back down into the spiritual heart. This gives a base for the mind mid-way along the spinal column. One can be joyfully engaged in existence here while remaining in a subtle state of being while at the same time keep oneself grounded and in the body. Like the great ceiba tree, one extends high into the heavens while also rooting oneself deep into the earth. Unchecked kundalini force will eventually liberate you but it can kill your body if not careful. One gets attached to spiritual bliss and experiences but must know how to balance them out. It is better to save that intensity for when it is really time to leave all work and thereby the physical body, and never before then. Like the Upanishad says, “Desire to live 100 years while working in joyful unity with Brahma.”

#tantra #tantramaya #yoga
