---
layout: post
comment: true
title: Cognitive Dissonance and Collective Insanity
tags: [Social Tantra]
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/frat.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
While I was a student at UT, a group of drunken fraternity boys  pushed a piano through a window that fell 10 floors and killed 2 people in the street below. As if there were not a better use for a grand piano! All of these bone-heads got together and decided they were not responsible. They collectively blamed the victims. "Why were those stupid people walking the streets at 3 am?" they argued. My professor of social psychology marveled at this phenomenon of "cognitive dissonance." Cognitive dissonance is a mental state that occurs when there is a major contradiction in the structures of the ego. A powerful event that is different and contradicts the projections of its habitual reality creates a state of dissonance and inner tension in the mind. Instead of being only superficial and frivolous boys, they are now guilty of killing innocent people. They thought they were good people, perhaps the best, and now they are seen as criminals. To neutralize this cognitive dissonance, this state of tension induced by a great contradiction and confusion to the ego's reality, one has to invent excuses that serve the confused ego and create an acceptable story so that one can continue thinking in the same way as before so that one's projections  about “reality” are not contradicted and interrupted. The psyche must avoid at all costs this painful state of cognitive dissonance. We are all cognitive misers and always look for excuses and pretexts rather than the complex truth. If you can not find an excuse, then you live in torment. In the case of frat boys, they can not bear the social censure and personal guilt and simply pass the blame on some "other". This is, of course, much easier when each individual has the rest of the "team" supporting him.

These superficial socialites with the Greek letters were often conformist nationalistic and patriotic types that become model citizens and good leaders in business and government. Does the irresponsibility of these students reflect the reality of society in general? We live in our isolated world and only care about our selfish well-being, or perhaps only our near and dear ones. How many people are concerned about economic wars and our military-industrial complex that undermine democracy by sabotaging the economies and governments of weaker nations?  Who thinks about environmental degradation, economic exploitation of other people on the planet, and widespread degeneration of the human soul trapped in this  materialistic, deterministic cage that so much of our world has become? 

Most people are just repressed  frat boys on the inside. Most have a cold indifference or simply a flagrant ignorance and prefer to watch TV, eat Big Macs, and buy strange things to fill their emptiness. Who will criticize if everyone is living in the same way?  It can not be bad if everyone else is part of the scheme, if the national sentiment gives one an opiate to filter anything that creates this cognitive dissonance. Why not go on raising the flag a little higher than one's cognitive dissonance? It enables individuals and society to continue their impunity and irresponsibility. How will the mundane and selfish American mentality ever change and take responsibility for the damage that is being created around the world with such a petty, self-centered bias which serves nothing but the base appetites? Most people who follow this kind of superficial ideology do not care about what happens to people in other places, as long as they continue to live in narcissistic overabundance. Their ideological distortions hide the ugly truth that they have to kill others to steal the natural resources and labor of others.  That's why hardly anyone in the US  will believe that there is a genocide in Mexico, for example, and that his predatory lifestyle and political ignorance is responsible for so much destruction and suffering for the planet and its people. The first world is the parasite of the third.

Personally, I have received great benefits by being born in the US: a good family, education and a safe environment in which to live. However, when one peers out of the false security bubble of "The Truman Show", develops a natural, spiritual and universal consciousness, one begins to see the terrible things that the politicians, bankers and corporations are doing to the world. So that a few can live in wretched excess, the masses of humanity have to live in misery. And for what end? The modern materialistic society of the United States is so full of mental pathologies that people often end up suffering more than the oppressed and exploited in the third world. Often I see more light in the eyes of the indigenous who live under tin roofs in the mountains than in the people of modern suburbs where I grew up. Though poor and forgotten, at least those people still have a piece of land and have not been overcrowded urban slums to be devoured by capitalist matrix. There are still people who are truly of this earth.

However, this situation is an absurd instability that can not last. At present there is an internal revolution within the intelligence systems of many governments around the world. Whistleblowers are emerging from behind so many nooks and crannies. There is a division between those who would sustain national solidarity against the will of the imperialist multinationals that benefit from this spread and perpetuate the violence that makes us all enemies. We overvalue their knowledge and power. Its existence is based on nothing more than the destruction and distortion of material and social reality. Behind the power that we give them, they are actually insecure and fearful people hiding behind the status-quo. Their only power is that our weaknesses and acceptance of their lies have not given us other solutions than their distortions, exploitation, and wars of annihilation. Whether American, Israeli, Mexican, etc., intelligence officials know that it is a show of blatant lies that cover a brutal reality and that their states are manipulated by  bankers and multinational corporations. Intelligence is a two-edged weapon. These people whose profession is a lie and create war and destruction are in a deep part of his psyche actually well aware of the weaknesses in their networks of lies. No matter how sick and distorted their minds have become there is always a live witness that sees through their game of lies. They are not dumb beasts, but degenerate intellectuals. There remains some portion of an inner intelligence that makes them uneasy and restless. To reflect and resound these lies back to them is the duty of all who love liberty and seek a better and more balanced world. Leaders play the game of psychological terror, as well as actual, aggressive terror. Should we not find a more subtle and intelligent way to return this destruction upon them? Should we not rise above their petty little ideologies and feelings with the highest universal humanism and spiritual strength to reflect their hell back upon them? Make the mind a laser that penetrates through this darkness to send this mass of foul lies back to the perpetrators. This refined interior light will protect you personally and help repel their attacks on our collective human society. We must tap our reserve forces in the deepest part of the mind to defend against this degeneration and impunity. Neurosis and psychosis is the natural result of most people who do not renounce the path of lies and destruction. Let them destroy themselves rather than others. The stronger you are, the more their own distortions fall back upon them. There is some good that torments this fragmented and sick state of existence. That is where to attack in silence and secrecy, as they will not be conquered by the "peace and love" entreaties. Their weakness is in the same point as their cognitive dissonance and false consciousness. What does the shrewd capitalist know of the greater forces in the universe, these demons who exploit and kill for finite matter, poor ideology and petty ego? Perhaps some will change, but most eventually be devoured by their own psychopathology because of such internal distortion. They are cunning, but a deeper moral intelligence connects us to true power and knowledge in the universe. They do not know the power of Tao, of dharma, the universal moral order of the universe. A mind without spiritual awareness is like a ship lost at sea, full of holes, and sinks slowly.

The leaders and also their followers also carry the burden of truth through the lie. Those who accept the popular lies also pay the price in the end. Although most are not aware that they are ultimately working towards truth, even through his own degeneration. The materialistic and narcissistic example of existence with all its pathology has given proof to the world of its unsustainability and its inevitable madness. This giant collapsing on itself is teaching many lessons to the world of how not to live.
