---
title: Possession
tags: [Social Tantra]
{% highlight yaml %}
share: false
{% endhighlight %}
---


{% capture images %}
	/images/complex.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
I saw the first images of carnage during the first Gulf War my last year in high school.  I was disgusted and ashamed. Although most of the teachers and leaders in society were supporting the government propaganda of a justified attack, there were also a few dissenters in the public school system who gave alternative views.  I had been influenced by one such teacher.  I really had no strong political views but I learned just enough of modern politics to entirely mistrust our government.  At the same time a giant boil appeared on my cheek.  It was enormous and swollen and very embarrassing.  As the fluid oozed out all I could think about were the images of the bodies of the hotel clerks in Bhagdad who were killed by misguided guided missiles.  I was ashamed to be an American.  No more John Wayne and heroic Green Berets saving the day; just filthy rotten imperialists and duped, flag-waving morons robbing and murdering weaker societies for their natural resources.  Well, for several years at least I vacillated between that extreme definition of my countrymen or the definition that they are also victims exploited by bad education and capitalist pseudo-culture. Either way, fascism always ends up taking hold of empires in the end.

I saw the first images of carnage from the first Gulf War during my last year in high school.  I was disgusted and ashamed.  Although most of the teachers and leaders in society were supporting the government propaganda of a justified attack, there were also a few dissenters in the public school system who gave alternative views.  I had been influenced by one such teacher.  I really had no strong political views but I learned just enough of modern politics to entirely mistrust our government.  At the same time a giant boil appeared on my cheek.  It was enormous and swollen and very embarrassing.  As the fluid oozed out all I could think about were the images of the bodies of the hotel clerks in Bhagdad who were killed by misguided guided missiles.  I was ashamed to be an American.  There was no more John Wayne and heroic Green Berets saving the day; just filthy rotten imperialists and duped, flag-waving morons robbing and murdering weaker societies for their natural resources.  Well, for several years at least I vacillated between that extreme definition of my countrymen or the idea that they are also victims exploited by bad education and capitalist pseudo-culture.  Either way, fascism always ends up taking hold of empires just before their demise.


During the second invasion of Iraq in the spring of 2003 the boil returned in exactly the same place.  It was like a malevolent spirit that still haunted me.  I was no longer ashamed of being an American because I had become a universal citizen by then.  I really saw us as no more different than the German population around the time of Hitler.  However, I still had those same feelings of disgust with the mindless American populace that unwittingly goes along with the plans of the military industrial complex, bankers and politicians that make all of this profitable war business and propaganda possible.  More than just a rebellious attitude against authority, it was rather an attitude that these worms have no right to inflict this terror on any human being, especially when the justifications for aggression are based on crude lies.

I had just moved to Mexico in 2003 and met a young couple who were very concerned about the war.  They were intelligent, educated, and had a very humanistic outlook.  They had a new-born baby at the time and were a very happy family. However, they were horrified at how the United States was so blatantly pulling off this scheme that any reasonable intelligent person unbiased by Fox or CBS could clearly see through.    The wife seemed to be deeply affected by the of war and was becoming even more so as time went on.  Although I don't think they were actively protesting in the streets, I did hear of them attending some social and ceremonial gatherings of a pacific nature.  Slowly she began to become depressed and withdrawn.  Nobody heard from her anymore.  There was a Summer Solstice meditation event soon afterwards in which we heard from other friends that she had become very depressed, would not talk to anybody and was hardly even interested in caring for her baby.  Her husband was very worried and did not understand what was happening to her.  

She arrived and gave a faint smile to everyone.  I hardly recognized her.  There seemed to be nobody at home.  My wife took her into a back room of the clinic away from all of the people participating in the festival in order to talk with her and give her some naturopathic treatments.  I could see her husband was very concerned and was having to give a lot of time helping to care for the baby.  

About an hour later I was called back into the room.  My wife asked me to touch the crown of her head.  She asked me if I could feel something strange.  I did so and felt a terrible, evil presence.  It was similar to the feeling I had with my boil but much, much stronger.  I knew that this was an evil too powerful to be coming from her.  It was like a giant, super-personal plasma blob of evil that was in the room.  I felt sick and went into the next room to lie down.  Ten minutes later my wife came in and said her patient was feeling much better.  By that time I had already begun to decipher what was affecting her.  My wife saw that I was abnormal and asked me if I absorbed something.  I replied that I believe I had.  My heart was pounding as if I had run a marathon.  I could distinctly feel another presence inside of me.  I had never felt like there was some other being existing inside me before.  Yes, maybe I had had some strange experiences with deeper parts of my existence but it was always an experience with the various aspects of my own self.  My wife immediately lost her non-attachment as a healer and began to worry about me.  She wanted to take me to the hospital, which was quite ironic because she always “stole” patients from hospitals before the butchers took people's organs out.  She was crying and begging me not to die.  I laughed and told her to shut up because I am fighting for my life with all of my force and the last thing I need is for my doctor to say I am going to die!

I lied there all night listening to the suggestions of this dark entity.  I knew it was either it or I that would be alive in the morning.  Fortunately, my life was very full and vibrant and I didn't accept any of the suggestions from this evil.  It was like a pattern that simply made everything negative and distorted-  pessimistic and destructive thoughts, hateful feelings, while at the same time it siphoned the life out of the body.  It was a contest to see which mental pattern would control this body, the evil plasma or my own conscience.  I could now understand very well what was affecting our friend and her family.  

After a few hours I recovered a little.  The woman had fallen asleep and I went to speak with her husband.  I was exhausted but said that I believe everything will now be alright.  He seemed a little relieved.  I awoke with a terrible headache.  It stayed with me a week or so while this presence was being digested.  In the meantime the family learned meditation and we spent much time with the baby and all was alright.  It was the most terribly illuminating experience I had ever had up until that point in my life.  It was the beginning of a live microvita study that has only gotten wilder as the years pass on.
