---
title: Neem Tree and Flute Tantra
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
---
---
<em>"O yogi, sit in lotus under the sacred neem and together make impenetrable conscious force with nature. The death troopers will receive a great blessing from your practice. Infinite, white burning light penetrates and ignites their darkness. An immediate reaction shakes their world. Those who dealt so much terror may die in terror of Mother Kali, protector of the planet and of yogis. The next embryo they inhabit will finish its recapitulation with gills and fins. There they will “swim in idle waters and drink other fishes piss.”</em>

Not many people understood the context of these phrases when I published them with this photo last year. It was a very dark time and I remembered a very dark punk rock song from my youth about reincarnation and how Oedipus complex-ridden perverts are reborn as fish. I never thought anything useful would come out of those memories but I realized that they were quite insightful! The narco death soldiers had just returned to the valley. They had come and gone several times in the last few years. Their soldiers get killed off regularly and there were always new ones ready to come and inhabit their nearby camp. There they keep hostages and then kill them and throw their bodies in the mountains.  I welcomed them back with a solo of Gluck's “Dance of the Blessed Spirits” on my kena bamboo flute. I finished and they returned the message with gunfire. “Okay, now you all want some of my oboe too?”

I truly felt protected and I didn’t worry. At first, I saw it as an ideational, meditative stance to create a protective field around our territory so as to keep their evil away. “As you think, so you become,” say the yogis. I won’t even consider it a possibility that they harm us, and so they won't. However, as I continued to play and further pound them with Gluck and Bach, I realized that I was probably playing requiems for their upcoming departure from the planet. I thought of how those boys were probably forced into the paramilitary part of the cartel and they probably weren’t that different from the rest of the youth in the area. Human beings will do almost anything under forced coercion, at any time and any place. Soldiers hardly ever really know what they fight for. These boys are dying in a war insidiously designed to make Mexicans kill Mexicans while the gringos continue to rob their country blind. The plan is to let the locals do the raping and pillaging while the imperialists purposely take advantage of this situation.

After this realization, I played music for them not so much to scare them but to try to send these poor souls something beautiful. If they really are like the youth in this area, then they probably have suffered many deprivations and have never really felt much human warmth and compassion. There are very few nuclear families and almost all heads of the household are alcoholics. There are almost no opportunities for these outcasts. However, the system has designed a strategy to get rid of them and make money selling arms and drugs in the process.
They had already entered the ranch on a few occasions in the past. They are used to people being afraid of them. However, we decided to reprimand them. They were terrified. They said they heard voices in their heads and wanted to leave. They said they would give us their protection. “No thank you,” was the reply.

I don’t recommend this technique unless one is very fearless and has a really strong mantra! When confronting evil forces that could easily destroy one’s physical being, one’s only protection is innocence and purity. There is fear because there are impurities. We don’t yet fully understand that we belong to immortality and so we attach our identity to some notion of worldly temporality. <em>Sadhana</em> or meditation burns away the impurities and leads one to a natural state of innocence, at one with nature and spirit. “Who’s universe is this anyway, by what right do these narcos, their narco state and puppet governors have to wield this terror upon us?”

Circumstances have given me proof time and again that the only true protection in this world is to be at one with dharma, the moral order of the universe. “Those who protect dharma are protected by dharma.” Dharma is not about beliefs or religion but rather getting to the essence of things by deep contemplation and then know how to react to the situation from this pinnacled, illuminated perspective.

If for some reason I can’t concentrate in meditation, then a little spiritual music or kiirtan always helps. Instead of letting the mind be conditioned by terrible information coming from the world of men and their media, one surrenders to dharma, the silent and natural flow of events in the universe. One can truly feel the harmony of nature and spirit and that the force of <em>dharma</em>, the conscious force of nature whose only purpose is to serve what is pure and innocent. The best meditation is that which is totally surrendered to Brahma; one desires nothing but simply enjoys being at one with Brahma, the supreme entity. Similarly, the best music is that which is played with spiritual devotion. While in meditation or playing music under the neems or the nearby ceiba tree one totally gets lost in spiritual ideation. With music and meditation along with the protection of the neems and ceiba, one can do the necessary work and create a spiritually-protected atmosphere. To always feel that the Supreme Entity is near and dear, is always loving and looking over, dissipates all fear.

#tantra #tantramaya #yoga #neem #nature
