---
layout: post
title: Celibates and Sexuality
tags: [Social Tantra]
comments: true
---




I have had some requests to continue writing about my experiences with the yogis in India I met in my youth. I have been requested to speak more about the tips on channelising sexual energy as told to me by the yogi I mentioned in the essay "Form and Formlessness" last week.  I gladly concede to this because I believe that sexuality is one of the least understood subjects in human life.  Sex is a part of everbody's life, but few have found a tranquil solution to this knotty(no pun intended) subject.  

There is so much suffering caused by blind sexuality.  So many women are abandoned with children by men whose animal instincts soon pull them elsewhere after a little sensory gratification.  The trail of trauma for the woman may continue as she must struggle to care for the child that have been abandoned.  Or perhaps it was her unfulfilled or frustrated desires that caused the separtion to begin with.  One thing is certain, and it is that there are fewer and fewer examples of harmonious co-existence in human sexual-emotional affairs.  As a culture we have gone back into the stone age as regards to sexuality; only we don't have giraffs and rhinoceros to chase and hunt down in order to channelize this energy and give us some relief.  Instead there is emerging a whole culture of permissiveness and even indulgence.  In truth, this distortion of the sexual tendency leaves many with very little happiness remaining in marriage or interpersonal relationships.  Conversely, I see very little hope in "free love" and open relationships as well.  While some like the way it sounds in theory, I have always seen that somebody always ends up getting hurt.  What we need is love.  Sexuality doesn't necessarily have to ruin this but it usually does if one or both people lack insight into what emotive factors are really driving them deep within.  And it is only by going deep within and seeing these needs that one can find fulfillment in sexuality and relationships.  Very few people can altogether transcend these needs.  These people are very rare and very interesting.

I had a very normal sexual orientation in my youth.  Nothing was too extreme, neither repression or expression.  I had everything I needed to live a happy family life by the time I was finishing the university:  a good companion, a good education, and strong adademic interests that inspired future plans.  However, I discovered meditation and yoga in my second to last year,and then got initiated into a very serious tantric practice.  The next thing I knew I was single, just barely graduated the university due to lack of interest, and was on my way to India to find more truth.  

It was surprising to see how my sexuality began to diminish as I cultivated these practics.  I was still a normal heterosexual; everything still worked, only the fire had died down a little.  The fire was now kindling the desire for deeper spiritual experience.  In those days yoga was still a weird Asian or hippy thing, and not the popular practice that it has become today.  I knew nothing of contemporary yoga.  Fortunately, I learned from some very sincere and serious practitioners from India whom I met at the university.  I was beginning to understand what these older yogis had told me:  that with meditation there is deep insight and this deep insight into the mind and emotions helps one understand not just sex but all mental and biological tendencies.  Tantra Yoga was for me a "libidinal economy," a way of investing energy in other pursuits.  If you put energy in place B, then it is no longer in place A, the original place. As a psychology student I was very well aware with the concepts of suppression and repression and the illnesses and neurosis that they cause.  Transmutation was a different idea, however.  I never studied this in school.  Freud certainly didn't grasp this idea.  Perhaps Jung and the humanists did, however.  What impressed me most about Tantra Yoga wasn't elaborate, sophisticated theories, but the practical results of converting physical desire into mental desire.  And sure enough, my intellectual capacity exploded the more I practiced yoga and meditation and put on the laungota, the yogis loincloth.  Surely you have seen them; the "Tarzan apparatus," or "organic chastity belt."  My mind became so sharp, however I was no longer interested in intellectual pursuits.  All that mattered was finding the source of what was summoning me to make all sorts of renunciations that I never thought possible.  Maybe there was some difficulty in the beginning when I was still in the university surrounded by shapely co-eds.  However, for the most part it was a very sweet renunciation with promises of something greater.  I didn't scorn sexuality.  That would be a direct path to a repressive hell.  I just knew that there was something greater.  The awakening of the kundalini is more bliss than a thousand physical orgasms at once.  And the lover in this tryst is Infinite.

The only problem that I had with my new life-style is that I began to become very sensitive to the environment around me.  I began to feel people very deeply.  For example, instead of noticing that somebody was sad by the tone of their voice or facial expression, I began to feel their state of mind.  I would see somebody from far away on campus and get an impression about their state of mind.  What was especially difficult was when I had to share a room with another person.  I always dreamed of their inner life.  I shared my dreams with them and they were really grateful for the insight into their issues.  I once dreamed that I was in a love affair with a girl from Vermont.  We met together in a barn and....  When I awoke I was perturbed because I hadn't even thought of sex for several months.  I asked myself "why Vermont?  What do I have to do with Vermont?  I remembered that my room-mate was from Vermont.  I asked him if he had a lover there recently.  He just snickered and said, "you caught me!"  I was always very sociable.  However this new energetic sensitivity began to isolate me a little.  However, I had already decided that I wanted to be a monk and accepted this solitary yet blissful position in life.  

By the time I graduated and arrived in India I was having very intense kundalini experiences.  Nobody understood me except my mother and a few close friends.  That soon changed when I arrived at Ananda Nagar.  I felt like I had arrived at a very special learining institution.  It reminded me a little of Hesse's "The Glass Bead Game" only these men were mystics instead of intellectuals.  They did practical work as well.  The yogi whom I spoke of in last week's essay administrated a university in the day and meditated all through the night.  It was good to have a reference for work because I had only spiritual desires and didn't want to do anything else. He was a very advanced meditator and passed through spiritual passions that lasted several years in which he did very little work on the physical plane.  Instead, he was absorbed in the bliss of samadhi.  It is not that he was useless in these times.  Quite the contrary, his elevated vibration inspired many, but also made his little monastic brothers a little jealous of his spiritual achievements.
  
This monk had told me his secrets of transmuting sexual desire on one of our first encounters. He said that he never repressed anything.  I could see that this was true as he was very outspoken.  He openly criticized the crusty theocracy around him and told me with a hearty laugh that Ananda Marga would probably end up killing their own saints some day. He was bold and always expressed himself openly, especially when stubborn or dogmatic people needed a little kick in the rear.

He expressed his ideas about sexuality in a similar manner.  If a women's breasts appeared in his mind during meditation, he just let it happen.  He knew it was impermanent.  He would struggle with the image in his mind, then let his mind enjoy the form.  He still continued to do his meditation during these intrusive "fantasies."  Slowly his state of formless bliss would return.  He said that eventually he would feel compassion for this person and felt that if this desire manifested he could really harm another person emotionally because he was so god-intoxicated.  He knew that these were momentary inclinations  and that for him to take a lover would be a disastrous existential manuever.  This inspired him to embrace her within a radiant white light and to tell her she was dear to the divine and that he would never harm her.  He said that in the end he always saw his "lover" merging into the pure light of the eternal Atman, and returned to his peaceful meditations.

What he told me weren't some exact, specific techniques to make a desire disapper.  Rather it is an attitude and way of life in general that works to transform the mind and body with their desires.  Few people understand the deep reasons for spiritual discipline and what the yogi truly wants to achieve.  This monk was a robust, intelligent, and even handsome person.  He would have had no trouble impressing the ladies.  He was a far cry from the creepy, repressed preist that negates himself through repression and thereby degenerates his libido into dark perversions.  I truly believe he had developed the "heroic" state of meditation in which there remain very few desires and one thereby begins to let go of all inhibitions.  "All things come from god, how can anything harm me?"  Althought this is the attitude of the "heroic" yogi, it is also the motto of the sensualist who loses his/herself in these very same tendencies. Very few people can really become detached from desire without butchering themselves up on the inside with repressions and distortions.

Here I attach some of my writings from A Name to the Nameless related to this subject:

### Sexual Tantra

Now I have got your attention!   When speaking about the second, or svadhistana vortex, most people immediately think of sexuality.  The six vrttis or vortexes of the svadhistana vortex are indifference, depression, compulsion, lack of confidence, paranoia, and resentment.  These 6 tendencies have more to do with a lack of sound grounding in one's person rather than sexuality.  The sexual drive is rooted in the sensory mind, in the first vortex.  The problem is that due to a lack of awareness of one's emotional and physical needs, the sexual desire often gets confounded with these defense mechanisms.
	
It is quite natural and healthy that the sex instinct of the sensory mind finds higher expressions in higher centers.  In a balanced second vortex the sex drive hasn't reached its full maturity but still is not a blind animal instinct.  It has more to do with emotional security, which is the constant theme when discussing the svadhistana vortex.  The problem is that this biological instinct gets tangled up in the distortions and insecurities of the svadhistana, self-conceptual mind. The ego begins to exploit this gratification for its unconscious necessities and there is always suffering and degeneration.
	
I have never taken the so-called “sexual tantra” seriously.  Firstly, because the only people who I have ever known to practice such things were never really balanced.  Sure, they spoke of awareness and love and transmutation and all of those nice things, but it was just all too obvious that they were just sex addicts propelled by unconscious emotions.  They always left a trail of harm.  It may be that there were once some more conscious practices that really didn't trap people into their compulsions, but if they were in fact truthful, then would have to be based on yama and niyama, the ethical base for the practice of yoga.  Most sexual relations ultimately lead one to suffering.  It is a transgression of ahimsa, or no-violence, to project one's selfish urges onto another.  It is no wonder that in the 2 languages that I understand, the crude word for the sexual act can be  synonymous with the words cheating, deceiving, or generally harming another.
The only functional sexual tantra that I have ever known is to first be responsible and never try to harm anyone while at the same time make the indefatigable effort to try and understand the propensities of the second vortex.  The sexual distortions exploit these fundamental vrttis.  The more suffering, separation, and insecurity that there is in the svadhistana level, the more likely that sexuality will try and compensate for these emotions.    However, these necessities are valid and are so profound and fundamental to the personality that they really need to be understood.  Perhaps the blind compulsions are due to an untimely withdrawal of a mother's breast that left one sucking in nothingness.  Or perhaps sexuality has aligned itself with an inner, unconscious resentment and lack of confidence that tries to outwardly seduce and dominate through sexual dominance, games, or manipulation.

I have come to think that when there is no suffering, there is no desire, and where there is no desire, there is no suffering.  This is true for all desires, not just sex.  Few people can really understand this.  Ramakrishna once said that mundane pleasure is like a dog chewing a sharp bone and doesn't realize the “satiation” of this desire comes from its own blood.  It is fear and insecurity that keep us bound into the limitation of a separate self, and therefore bound to selfish desires.  Sometimes, even very highly developed minds overlook these underlying reverberations in the shadows of the emotions.  The pirates to our present state of bliss are often something unseen from our past.  I have found that the study of the vrttis, especially those of the svadhistana, are paramount for finding the psychological balance that permits intuitive, spiritual development.

This is an excerpt from the "Svadhistana Vortex" chapter of A Name to the Nameless.  The rest of the chapter explores how the 6 propensities of this vortex mask may mask themselves under sexuality.  You can find it on this site under Archives in the menu or download the whole work on pdf.  see menu.
