---
layout: post
title: A FEW FAVORITE STORIES FROM DADA IISHVARAKRSNANANDA
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
---

{% capture images %}
	/images/dadaIK.jpg
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}
Dada Iishvarakrsnananda or "Dada I.K." was my meditation and yoga teacher when I was in Ananda Marga. He was the most humane and friendly person I have ever known. I continue to admire his moral courage and feel that his sincerity, discernment, and pure intentions are a great inspiration for many. 

This is a story he wrote the other day. Its setting is in an intense political atmosphere in India after Anandamurti had refused to stop speaking about PROUT, a decentralized economic theory that he propounded. The communists in the West Bengal state government are attacking Anandamurti and killing his followers while at the same time the Federal, pro-capitalist government is also trying to ban his social activity. PROUT was too transcendental for both the commie state and the Federal pro-capitalist governments and Anandamurti was getting flack from both the Right as well as the Left. Anandamurti's institution, Ananda Marga Pracaraka Samgha, was later infiltrated by the CBI (which is like the CIA, only Indian). Many of his closest disciples betrayed him while others, like my friend Iishvarakrsnananda, went to jail in his teenage years for refusing to renounce these ideas even though he would have been given a presidential pardon and release for doing so. Many of his friends were brutally tortured and he himself almost died in jail but never renounced his principles. I have never known men with such clarity of purpose as I have known in Dada I.K.

### "I Still Love Them".  -Acarya Iishvarakrsnanada Avadhuta

Once Baba asked me if I had any questions. I had a question in my mind that had haunted me for around 15 years or more. But I was always afraid to talk to Baba. Either I forget that question or I was too afraid to talk whenever I met Baba personally. The question was not very good. But that day Baba was in very very happy mood and told me that I can ask any question to Him. I got some courage to ask the question. The question has made me very angry and upset. For some time I would jump out of the bed due to anger and hatred towards some sanyasi dadas who went against Baba and put Him in Jail. Sometimes my blood was boiling with anger.

I told Baba: "I went to Jail before you went to jail." At the time I was taking care Baba's quarter in 1971 in Ranchi. I was LFT (Local Full-time Worker) at that time. I was also Baba's body guard. When Baba left for Patna after Ananda purnima Dharma maha chakra I was travelling with Baba to Patna by security jeep. However, in last minute I was asked to take care of Baba's quarters in Ranchi along with a few other volunteers. So I came down from the Jeep . It was very painful for me to be separated from Baba. After a month of the departure of Baba the police arrested 33 Margis (members of Ananda Marga), LFTs and WTs (Whole Time workers), all on false charges. Madhvananda and 14 other sanyasi dadas were with us during the arrest.

My Question to Baba continued, "did the CBI did not know about you as Dharma guru? Those dadas had seen the power of spirituality, demonstration, and power of Taraka Brahma. Those dadas told me many spiritual stories about you. Those same Dadas went against you and made false accusations against you. When I think about those Dadas my blood boils with anger." When Baba listened to my words, He became totally peaceful. There was total silence. I never have felt such a silence in my life. It was total peace. He held my both of my hands for a long period. He remained in silence for quite a bit of time and then He told me that "I still love them."

All of my anger, hatred, and frustration was gone since that day. Baba used to say that Paramapurusa (Supreme Consciousness) cannot hate anyone. He repeated this several times in his talks: "Oh human being! what right do we have to hate anyone when almighty Taraka Brahma does not hate any one?"
Baba used to say that "you may like or dislike someone. But do not hate anyone." Baba was Parama Purusha, Taraka Brahma, and Satguru. Baba was a symbol of love. Baba is a symbol of love. Baba will be a symbol of love. Baba came here to flood the earth with love. Let all of His children work for spreading love. Love will unite us.



### THE POWER OF MANTRA AND THE POWER OF GURU  Dada Iishvarakrsnananda

Yesterday I wrote about a saintly Grhii Acarya (Married, Family Teacher), Sakal Deva.
Today I am writing about a serious incident which forced him to join Ananda Marga.
Acaraya Sakal Deva Dada was a fearless person. He was lawyer by profession . His body was well built . I did not have a chance to see him in his younger adult age but even at the age of 90 he used to walk in an erect position. Before he was in Ananda Marga, people were a bit afraid of him. He was bit rough and tough with people. He was not afraid of any one or anything. One day he was walking on the road . He saw a person in a black robe. After seeing the person, he became afraid. He was haunted by fear day and night after that . He went to temples and other religious places to overcome his fear. The lawyer who was known as fearless in Muzaffarpur had become full of fear.

On one rainy day, he started to run and fell down and was knocked unconscious. Some so-called low cast people in Bihar saw him lying unconscious and brought him near a temple. Somehow these local people knew about Ananda Marga tantric meditation practice in that area. They told him that Ananda Marga meditation will help you. He got the address of an acarya and went to see him but he could not find him there. The family of the Acarya gave the address of another Grhi acarya. He visited him. The Grhi Acarya was very lean and thin person . He wanted to overcome fear at any cost. He wanted to learn meditation but he put some strict conditions on his Acarya. His first condition was that he loves to drink whisky every day. He must be allowed to drink whisky as he will die without drinking whisky. He also eats meat at every meal. He must be allowed to eat meat every day. I forgot his third demand. The Grhi Acarya was a bit nervous. Sakaldev dada told me that to overcome his fear he wanted to learn sadhana (meditation) even if he were to have to force the acharya to teach him if the acharya would not have agreed to teach willingly. He would have easily overpowered him because the acharya was so thin. He was adamant to learn meditation. Finally Sakaladeva dada was taught meditation.. The Family Acarya told him that you may drink your whisky and eat meat every day, but you must practice meditation twice a day as well.
In the Ananda Marga meditation system, the Guru teaches meditation and the acarya is just a medium. Now the job was taken over by the Guru. The power of his mantra started to work.
After few days of sincere practice of Sadhana as per instruction of his Acarya, he went to eat his meat. Afterward, he kept vomitiing and vomiting. The same thing happened with his desire for whisky. When he went to drink whisky he broke the bottle with his bare hands out of repulsion for the whisky.
He gave up eating meat and drinking whisky. He told me that when he went to court, he would always drink whisky before making arguments in the court.. Such was situation of Acarya Sakal Deva Dada before becoming a margii.. Acarya Sakaldeva Dada took the shelter of Varabahaya (the blessing of fearlessness from the guru) and all fear went away.



### Spiritual Journey and Struggle: Part 3  -Dada Iishvarakrsnananda

We were a half dozen people in the training center. I was youngest of the trainees. We learned some basic philosophy, worker’s rules, etc. After the training we had to do SPT (Sadhana Piitha Training). We got a piece of cloth to wrap around us but no slippers, no shirt, no shoes.
We had to keep silence( Maona Brata) .We were not allowed to keep any money or any kind of possession. We were instructed to go to beg door to door in the morning and come back before noon. It was very hard thing for me; but I had no choice.

I used to go far away from the town; so that no known person should notice me.
One day I went very far away to the tribal village. I had collected some potatoes and rice. I used to utter 3 times “Hari Om Tat Sat” . If they gave me alms; I took them, otherwise, I moved to the next house. I was not supposed to talk and a say any words if some one asks me except “Hari Om Tat Sat” while I was begging.

One day I was walking on a road when I met a man. He wanted to talk to me, but I refused to talk with him. He continued and forced me to talk. I explained a little bit about Ananda Marga.
He told me that there is gathering where around 50 people are sitting.
“It will be nice if you come there and talk to them about your philosophy,” he told me.
I did not want to go there, but he forcefully persuaded me to go there. I was alone and there was no one else on the street. So I followed him.

When we arrived at the gathering people were sitting in a court yard and drinking tribal liquor and in the other side some ritual was going on. I wanted to leave the place and I told the person who had brought me there. He told me that he can not do anything as the Sardar ( head of the tribe) is responsible for this place. He told me to speak with the Sardar . I asked permission from head of tribe to leave. The Sardar told me that “you were brought here as a sacrifice to our Goddess. You can not leave this place.” I was surrounded by many people and I started to cry on the inside. The Dadas had told me that if there is any problem that I should use second lesson of meditation. I started to take second lesson, but the mantra did nothing. I was confused, but I did not cry. I was remembering Baba, but it did not work. I started to think that I will be killed and offered to the goddess and no one will know about it.

The complete memory of my life started to come back. Every one used to love me. All my family members were so close to me. For some time I was thinking about my father, sometimes about my mother, sometimes about my brothers, sisters, and sister-in-laws. Before becoming a Margii everyone loved me so much. I thought about my nephew and niece and how I used to play with them. I started to think that my family was right. I should not have joined Ananda Marga.

I will die and no one will know. No mantra, no Baba, no God was going to help me. I was a heart-broken man. Death without reason was meaningless. Every second I was thinking about death. I had lost all hope in God, Guru, Mantra, tantra. I was just thinking about my death every second.

I had reached there around 8 AM. Almost eight hours had passed there. They were chanting and sharping some axe and sword. I was watching and counting my time. Next they brought some home-made tribal liqueur called "handia".
I never had any kind of alcohol in my life. I refused it but they wanted to drug me. I was helpless. Four people came and some one held my hand, then some one opened my mouth and kept pouring liquor in my mouth. I did not know how many bottles they put inside me as I was half dead. They brought some rice to feed me but I refused, so again forcibly they put rice in my mouth and I somehow swallowed it.

It is impossible to express my feeling about this unwanted death as I had lost all hope.
I had some potatos in my begging bag. One person came and snatched my bag. He told me that he wanted to eat my potato. I gave it to him. Then somebody appeared out of nowhere. He told the man who was going to eat my potato: “do not touch that potato”. He further said: “do not take food from a beggar. This person may be saint, a swami, or god on the earth. If you take his things then I will smash your head.” The person who was going to take my potatos asked him: “who are you?” He replied: “that it is none of your business.” While this was going on a riot broke out. People were very drunk and they started to beat each other.

The unknown person who had appeared told me: “run away from here!,” but I had no energy to move. I was scared to death of the sharp axe and sword. The thought of death was moving through my head as they can kill me at any time. I did not move. The person again shouted: “run away from here!” In the end he came to me, grabbed my hand and we started to run. I was still afraid that they would follow me. We ran and ran until we came to the main road. This person told me: “Go, go to Baba.” Additionally, he said: “I will be here until you reach your place. If any one comes here I am going to chop off their heads one by one.”

It was almost dark when I reached my place. Dada Shyamananada was moving back and forth in front of Baba's gate. When he saw me he became very angry. He was very upset. He told me that Baba have not taken food and water since the morning. He has told them if his son does not come He will not eat and drink. I told Dada to go and tell Baba that I am back and that I will narrate the whole story.
He went to tell the news to Baba. After a few minutes Dada came back and told that the food and water which was for Baba has to be given to me. “That is instruction of Baba, there will be no prasad today,” Dada told me.I had wonderful meal. I once told this story to Baba when Baba had asked me how many times he has directly or indirectly helped me. This story was written during Baba’s life in Hindi and later translated into English.



### I GAVE THAT POWER ONLY TO YOU narrated by Dada Iishvarakrsnananda

I had written in a previous story that Baba had given power to Dada Dasaratha to screen people to have personal contact. Dada Dasaratha used to see the mental color of people and accordingly he used to either reject or send the people for personal contact. Once a very important person came to Jamalpur to have Personal contact.. He was sent to Dada Dasaratha for screening. Dada Dasratha entered his mind and saw the person was unfit for personal contact and so he rejected the person for personal contact. However, some top official of Ananda Marga started to put pressure on Dada Dasaratha to approve the person who was very, very important. Dada was in a dilemma. On one e side were top officials of Marga and othere side was Baba's instruction. Finally, Dada Dasaratha went to see Baba. He told the whole incident. Baba was furious., He told Dada Dasaratha that I gave that power to you only to decide. Nobody else. Do not have to listen to any one. In the end Mr. very, very important person did not get personal contact at that time. Baba was a great master that he did not differentiate between so called important people in society and an ordinary person. His rule was the same for everyone. That was his greatness. Glory to Lord Shrii Ananda Murti Jii.Param pita baba ki Jay.

### I WAS NOT ABLE TO FIND SOMEONE TO PLAY THIS DIFFICULT ROLE” 


It was the year 1987 and I had came from Hong Kong sector to attend Ananda Purnima Dharma Mahacakar. and RDS. I had a very good news report. I was very excited. Most of the central Dadas were happy about my good news report. But when Baba came to take report from usI was singled out by for for poor productivity. Two other Dadas were also singled out. For poor productivity a punishment was given. Negative microvita were put in certain part of body. The first day Baba made some commenst which I did not like. He asked all the Dadas to keep away from me. No one was allowed to be with me and some were taunting. Some were allowed to make bad comment. Some people were scolding for poor out turn. It was big drama. I felt much pain from the negative microvita which were making my whole mind negative. The next day again was same drama: shouting, scolding, making fun. Taunting, etc. My mind was becoming very negative.

It was the third day when Baba ask me to touch the feet of all Dadas and Didis. I did. I was asked to give a talk . Baba told me to give a talk on the effects of negative microvita. He also told me that to tell people that if they will not work for Marga then they will get negative microvita and suffer tremendously. It was a very difficult situation for me.

Baba also said that I gave many talks in South Korea. In a similar I should give a talk and convince everybody present to work for Marga, otherwise they will also get the application of negative microvita. My mind had became negative but I gave a talk although I was in pain. I almost became mad. RDS was over. We all went back to our place. I was staying in the Upper hostel. Around 1 AM SHUBHABUDDHANANDA.JI(VSS SG) and KRSNATMANANDA woke me up without saying a word. They put me in Jeep and I became afraid. They brought me Baba's Quarter in Ananda Nagar. I kept thinking the last three days that Baba has been informed wrongly about me. GS dada was lying on the floor in front of Baba's Door. GS Dada was sleeping. He woke up from sleep and told me that I have been transferred from Hong Kong sector to Manila sector in Bali (Indonesia). He then said to go back to sleep. After that they brought me back to upper hostel. I went to sleep. After Dharma Maha cakra and RDS the meetings were over. I went back to Kolkata.

I wanted to meet Baba personally. I request Dada Keshavananda who was Personal Assistant to Baba to get permission to see him, which I eventually did. My mind was still very very negative when I got the approval, but I became a little happy. I entered in to Baba's room and did sastaunga pranam to Baba and got up. Baba asked about the good news from Hong Kong sector. I started to tell the good news. Baba became very upset and I was asked to leave the room and I left the room Immediately. I was totally shocked, pained, disturbed and confused. The question started to come in my mind about this “good news.” When I came out of the room many dada asked me about my meeting with Baba. I told them that Baba said nothing to me in very angry mood whenever they asked me.
I became very restless and sad. This was worst test given by a Tantric Guru.
I was walking like a mad man in the Lake Gardens. One dada came to me and told me that Baba wanted to see me again. I told him that I do not want to see Baba. I was thinking Baba was going to punish me again. I saw Dada Keshavananda was running towards me. He asked me to go to see Baba. I told him that I do not want to see Baba. My Mind had become totally negative but he grabbed my hand and dragged me and threw me into Baba's room.

When I went in to his room Baba was in Kalyan Sundram Mudra . He said to approach him. His voice was so sweet . It is hard to explain in words. Baba said, “I was not able to find anybody to play this difficult role. You did it best. I have to teach people. You have had to undergo much suffering in this RDS. Come closer and sing me a song.” All of my negativity and the effects of the negative microvita were gone. I was in a different world and different mood. I sang a song but it was not Prabhat samgiita. It was song of the 60's that I had learned in Dharma cakra when I became a Margii in 1967. I liked the song very much. It was a popular song. I realized I made a big blunder when I came out of His room. I should have sung Prabhat Samgiita. But when you have become mind less, when you do not have your own mind, then you can not decide wrong or right.
Most importantly Baba did not objected when I sang the other song in place of Prabhat samgiita. It was very important for me to see Baba in the Kalyan Sundram Mudra.

### THE GURU’S ORDER MUST BE FOLLOWED 

On March 5th,1967 five Dadas were murdered in Ananda Nagar by a communist inspired mob. Baba made a committee of five members to meet Jyoti Bashu who was then home minister of West Bengal. It was a united front government ruled by Bangla Congress, a breakaway group of the national Congress Party and the Marxist Communist Party. Our five members were sent to meet the home minister, including Acarya Lalan who was the first principal of our Ananda Nagar Degree College. When they went to meet Jyoti Basu, the home minister, they were not allowed to meet him and reported back to Baba. Baba asked a question to them. “Did all committee members go to see Jyoti Basu?” The committee members replied, “we all went except Acarya Sakaldeva.” Baba was a bit upset. He said we must take Acarya Sakaldevaji with you. They all again went to see Jyoti Basu to submit the memorandum. As per instruction of Baba All went to see Jyoti Basu.They were allowed to meet him this time. They had earlier violated the instruction of Guru by not bringing Acarya Sakaldeva and that is why they were not allowed to see Jyoti Basu.
The reason for removing Acarya Sakaladevaji from group to see Jyoti Basu was due to some kind of complex in the mind of the committee members. Acarya Sakaldev Dev Dada had very simple dress. He was very simple looking person, although by profession he was a lawyer. He was a family Acaraya (Grihi Acarya). All others were well-dressed. Acaray Sakala Deva is no longer on this earth. He was the acarya of Acarya Svarupananda Avadhuat, Acarya Sujiit Kumarji, and Acarya Nirmohananda Avadhuta, among others. He remained in Ananda Marga and kept working for the Legal Department until his death. He was a saintly and very sweet-natured person. He was great devotees of Baba. He spent some time with me in Delhi Baba's quarter when I broke my leg in 1999. I also spent time in south ex Delhi Jagrti. when ever I went to India. I always had wonderful Satsanga with him. He is grand father of Prasenjitji who is working with a university in the UK.
