---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Introduction to \"The Spiritual Heart\""
comments: true
---



By examining the spiritual heart we can begin to understand the reasons for the limitations the egocentric “I” notion that distorts the pure reflection of pure and infinite consciousness ("Hunab Ku" in Tantra Maya or "Shiva" and "Atman" in Indian tantra) in the human mind. Within the spiritual heart exist the roots of our divided and fragmented modern consciousness but also the qualities of compassion, understanding and unity with the true “I” within. All of the expressions of the so-called “vortexs” are balanced by understanding the spiritual heart, what yogis call the Anahata Chakra. 

I prefer to use the term “vortex” instead of “chakra.” The traditional symbol of the Anahata chakra is a lotus flower with 12 petals. Each “lotus petal” is literally a subtle energetic vortex spiraling out of the greater vortex or “lotus,” like many small tornadoes that group together to form one giant vortex. These petals or minor vortexes are known as vrttis- vortexes of mental energy. These vrttis vibrate the entire mind and body and qualify them so as to express particular states of thought and emotion. Vrttis are the fundamental intelligence behind our thoughts and feelings, the hidden programming of human cognitive and emotional life that vibrate the entire mind-body system. The Anahata Vortex is subtle like the higher vortexes with their finer, cognitive tendencies, but at the same time has grosser qualities like the lower vortexes that express more instinctual and egocentric tendencies.

Up until the Anahata Vortex the human being is but a “raging bundle of desire in a dying animal,” to use the words of Yeats.  It was said previously that the Manipura Vortex gives one an intimation of the infinite with its infinite desire for expansion, but falls short of the pure conception by projecting infinite desire on finite objects.  The Manipura at the navel is still governed by ontological hunger with its accompanying cravings, demands, and impositions on the objective world.  It can ask “how?” and then proceed to manipulate and maneuver the external world according to its internal desires, but it lacks the self-reflective conscience to ask “why?” or “what for?” in a deeply moral sense.  The Manipura Vortex is balanced only when it is under the guidance of the more conscious and moral Anahata.  It should be very clear to the reader that much of the present day ills in our materialistic and capitalistic pseudo-culture are due to the over activation and exploitation of the Manipura Vortex. 

  “Anahata” means not harming and it is at this layer of mind that truly rational, self-reflective, compassionate, and judicious human qualities begin to emerge.  It is the vortex located in the center of the chest and is often referred to as the "heart chakra."  It is the fulcrum on which rests the directional flow of the human mind.  Below here the mind moves outward, toward matter.  Here and above the mind can move inward, toward pure Spirit, toward Hunab Ku.

The Anahata Vortex is associated with the Intuitive Mind (Vijinanamaya Kosa), the layer of mind associated with intuition and the aerial factor.  Instead of the Anahata Vortex via the Intuitive Mind being associated with the vibration of form, like the Manipura, it is here associated with the vibration of touch or impression.  With the Anahata’s functioning on this higher, elemental level it receives the subtle impressions, in the form of abstract ideas and intuitive feelings, which emanate from objects.  It has the possibility of perceiving a deeper idea of the essence of the object thought or felt upon, be it an object in nature or another living being.   The thought forms or archetypes of the Manipura, creative level are but manifestations of the original, formless ideas as they exist in the Vijinanamaya Kosa. The Intuitive Mind is the realm of pure ideas that Plato, Socrates, and the ancient Greek philosophers inquired about.

Although the Manipura Vortex (3rd Chakra, the "City of Jewels") and the Creative layer of mind associated with it are endowed with intellect and creativity, the mind is still too preoccupied with the fiery, impulsive propensities that keep the mind moving outward, into the senses, which thereby prevent a deep, rational, and intuitive understanding of self and world.  The Manipura is about self-acquisition while the Anahata is about self-actualization.  Due to the relative lightness of the aerial factor and the self-reflective propensities associated with the Anahata, the mind is here able to reflect and gaze upon form from a more enlightened vantage point.  If the Manipura level of mind is likened to a fire that not only enlightens but also consumes the realm of form, the Anahata is like the lightness of a supine cloud that drifts languidly above the multitudinous forms in nature.

The Anahata is only the beginning of a non-attachment that leads to a transcendence of the separate, phenomenal self.  The individual ego and will are still present but much more self-reflective and non-impulsive than the Manipura.  Here the ego and the will become an object for the understanding or discriminative mind to reflect upon.  And it is because there is now an abstract self concept that is rooted deeply in the Intuitive Mind , the personality (Aham) can not just be conscious of the desires and propulsions in the sub-conscious mind, but also redirect those very same tendencies to more conscious and intelligent outlets.  With this capacity to consciously redirect the propensities that fetter the mind into crude mental limitations, the Aham personality is then able to reflect more upon the nature of itself.  There is therefore a much greater manifestation of the pure and limpid I-feeling at the Anahata.  Instead of the self being bound up and defined by the restless, incessant activity of the ego or doer-I, the sense of self is now more of a witness of the ego's activity.  The “I” is still bound to the ego to a degree but it is lucid enough to know that it is independent.  This deep sense of “I exist” or knowledge of self existence can question what tendencies lead toward an inner state of harmony and self understanding and which ones lead one further into spiritual and psychic bondage.  In short, a deep sense of morality and conscience is born here; one much deeper than a mere superego that was imposed from without at the Manipura level.

It is at the Anahata that we see the first manifestations of dharma or psycho-spiritual movement, the movement of the mind toward the spirit.  The sense of self abstracted from the senses and extroverted will can more freely pursue the inner life and seek higher meaning.  It can understand the way the Tao or the moral order of the universe functions so as to conform the individual will with that cosmic will.  The mind begins to understand that it is only through becoming a responsible, conscious, and whole person that there can be any real meaning in life.  The life lived only through the senses and passions and superficial form is now seen as a great bondage that can never bring any deep fulfillment.

As mentioned above, the Anahata is only the beginning of self-transcendence.  There is the abstracted feeling of the "I" that is ultimately independent of all objective qualities but the identity is still bound and mediated by subtle mental concepts defining the nature of self.  There is not yet the undifferentiated and pure expression of the eternal I- feeling unmediated by the self-referential concepts of the Aham.  Although there is a great degree of the pure I-feeling present the mind still uses concepts to refer itself to the objective experiences that it is attached to (the memories, personal history or self-narrative, self-defining characteristics, intellectual and emotional qualities, etc).   

It can be said that the Anahata Vortex is the occupation of the mind with the "I."  The ego or Aham is not necessarily seeking to indulge in its limited self, but seek its origin in the I-feeling.  The problem comes about when this fascination with the nature of ones consciousness is projected into one's finite self-concept.  All of the growth energy of self discovery instead goes into some form of egotism.  Vanity, narcissism, selfishness, and hypocrisy are the results.

Half the 12 vrttis of the Anahata are "positive," growth promoting vrttis and the other half are "negative" or at most neutral, self-justifying defense tendencies that perpetuate the ego's limited boundaries instead of expanding and refining them.  There is still a limited and bounded sense of self, but with the potential to discriminate between vice and virtue.  There is also still the boundary of self and not self to be overcome, although not as marked as in the Manipura and Svadhistana.  Harmony, balance, and proportion are key elements in this fulcrum that is the Anahata to help determine what is growth-promoting and virtuous (self, or good for the self) and what is vice, or inappropriate for spiritual self-growth (not self).

In the Anahata there appear to be two hexagons. Really, there is one.
They seem different because one moves clockwise or centrifugally, and the
other moves counter-clockwise or centripetally. Here we can see the
fundamental yin-yang or centrifugal-centripetal interplay of the universe at
work within the human mind. Together these forces combine to make the Anahata Vortex.  These are 12 points at which the balance and imbalances of the human consciousness may express themselves in a refined way. When there is perfect balance and there is no escape through any vortex or vrtti in the 12 vertices, Shiva (Hunab Ku) always enters the human mind through the spiritual heart with its neutral force of consciousness or citishakti.  Citishakti is the Consciousness that controls Shakti, creative energy because this divine creative energy has its essence in Shiva, or Consciousness.  Shiva and Shakti are like fire and its capacity to burn; they are completely and eternally inseparable. All creation in this universe is due to the activity of Shakti and the conscious base of Shiva that silently witnesses the play of creation while at the same time offering its being as the essence on which Shakti may create.

The right side of the Anahata is dominated by the solar or centrifugal energy of Shakti. The left side of the Anahata is lunar or centripetal Shakti. The centrifugal force under the control of the witnessing entity of Shiva becomes the Son, the primordial creative expression of the Supreme Consciousness within the human and personal medium. It is for this reason that the Vedantic sages meditated on the right
side of the spiritual heart, the nexus of where the super-personal Atman
“touches” the personal and human.

The left side of the Anahata is the "Mother of God", the centripetal energy of Shakti that always brings the expressions of the Son (the centrifugal movement of creation) back to the neutral force of Shiva-Consciousness. The centripetal force never lets the centrifugal force become entirely lost into manifold expression and always brings it back to center. Together, in balance, these binary forces of creation manifest in the human being to the grade that there is a balance in the 12 vortices or vrttis at the 12 vertices of the 2 hexagons. When there is less duplicity,
arrogance, vanity, and selfishness(negative vrttis), and more love,
discernment and faith (positive vrttis), then the process of the unification of
the microcosmic consciousness into the Macrocosmic Consciousness of
Shiva is well under way. It is here in the spiritual heart of Anahata that the nameless, transcendental godhead may evolve a name for itself, for us, within each of us.

entire work of The Spiritual Heart on this site: <a href="http://tantramaya.org/the-spiritual-heart/">http://tantramaya.org/the-spiritual-heart/</a>

or download The Spiritual Heart here:  <a href="https://cmdr0.blaucloud.de/index.php/s/VZXchJaawWf93SI">https://cmdr0.blaucloud.de/index.php/s/VZXchJaawWf93SI</a>
