---
layout: post
comment: true
title: Microvita and Tantra Maya ch.11 "Unusual Microvita Stories"
tags: Microvita
---

{% capture images %} /images/microvita.jpg {% endcapture %} {% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %} 
The previous chapters have been the result of years of study.  I wrote these chapters around 2005 and am now editing them.  In the explaination of the classifications and function microvita I have tried to be as rational and objective as possible with these very subjective experiences.  I tried to keep these ideas based on my own experience as much as possible without extrapolating ideas.  This is a fundamental duty for the spiritual investigator of tantric and microvita science.  One should try to be as objective as possible while removing personal prejudices or ideological biases that skew interpretations of these subtle perceptions.  Aurobindu saw yoga as "mystical empiricism."  I like the spirit empirical science, of having cross-references and peer review and think that yogis who try to teach metaphysics to others should be as scientfically minded as possible, scrutinize their own experiences, and review them with other investigators.  It is a rigorous, self-critical position that I have tried to maintain throughout the work.  Now for the fun improvisation.

The following stories are collections of personal experiences or experiences of people close to me.  There are no literary exaggerations.  Only a few small details have been changed in a few stories regarding the people involved.  I did not want to reveal the deep experiences of others in my book.  Instead, I attributed just a few of these real experiences of people very close to me to myself, the narrator in these stories.  Now it is time to apply theory.  I hope you can discern between some various classes of positive mentities like the Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Yaksas, etc., as well as understand the influence of some negative mentities.

### A Few Stories of Quetzal Manik (Pluma Blanca)

Pluma Blanca always had a very elevated vibration. When people came near him they would begin to sway in a counter-clockwise direction. Sometimes their heads would begin to tilt and subtly twirl in an almost imperceptible circular motion. He explained that whether you are speaking of the Cosmic Nucleus of Hunab Ku or the Conscious Nucleus of the Atman radiating behind our minds, the movement around either a physical or spiritual nucleus is always a play of the centripetal and centrifugal forces. They have the same dynamics on all planes of being. There are physical vortexes of motion in the physical world where there is the weight and gravity of matter and also vortexes of subtle, mental energy that act and interact with thoughts, feelings, and perceptions. To harmonize the macrocosm with the microcosm, the universe with the individual, one must find this secret flow of Tao both within the mind and in one’s world, planet, and its plants and animals.
On the outside Pluma Blanca’s ancestors studied the movement of the planets and the natural cycles. This practice was never disconnected to the internal practice of meditation. Meditation is the science of seeing behind all of the vortexes and movements of the human mind. A mind that is pure sees into and understands the movements around Hunab Ku, the Cosmic Nucleus that is within us all. Every human being that has truly searched has seen into this great treasure deep within a balanced human existence. We understand that there is always something pure, eternally renewed when we live in harmony with creation. This inspiration has never abandoned us, only we have forgotten It.

A Not So Fleeting Romance

Pluma Blanca (White Feather), or Quetzal Manik (in maya), came by the clinic for a surprise visit a few years ago. It was my first time to see him. He seemed to know all about me but didn’t say very much. He hardly even spoke Spanish. He liked to talk to me about Tantra and share ideas of the Tantra of the Mayas, the lineage of meditation and healing that he learned from his fore-fathers. Although a healer of all types of diseases, he was fundamentally a mystic who loved to meditate in the forest. He was my wife’s teacher, an indigenous Maya from Campeche. When my wife was attending a European patient he went to the clinic and entered the treatment room directly. He grabbed a pencil and a piece of paper and then wrote down a list of names on the paper. The names were the first and last names of the lovers the young woman had in the last year. The list was a little too long.
He would speak in Maya but nobody understood him. He then began to write to her in Spanish while somebody else translated to her in English. He explained that when humans have sexual intercourse their minds remain energetically connected for 7 years. There is a subtle transmission and continued connection of mental energy shared between the 2 entities. This may be something very pure and harmonious or it may be painful or even degrading, depending on the nature of the relationship. Even though they may never see, nor even think of each-other again, there remain subtle mental impressions that “reside” within each-other.
Another complicating factor is the mental confusion that one carries if one changes or has frequent partners. The imbalanced, frustrated, and distorted energies of others sympathetically vibrate with the minds of an individual person, and vice-versa. It sounded as if he was speaking of the transmission of a mental virus in much the same way as a physical virus, but with the mind and its clusters of memories and emotions as the vehicle of transmission directly into another mind. Instead of being infected physically, one remains “infected” by another’s mind for 7 years. A part of that person’s soul, or subtle mind is carried inside and continues to live inside of another, for better or for worse. The soul becomes an over-crowded house instead of a silent temple.
He explained quite compassionately that her emotional instability was only worsened by her romantic adventures and were gradually making her physically ill. She was an attractive young woman with very liberal values who simply didn’t understand these ideas before he explained it to her. She didn’t feel threatened nor judged, and seriously pondered his diagnosis. I believe that her conscience understood what Pluma Blanca was communicating. She knew she was suffering and wasn’t happy and somebody had just probed into her private life to offer her some clues as to how to understand her confusions. Before the treatment she was terrorizing all of the young spiritually-disciplined boys around here with her tiny, mini skirts. After that treatment she put on a more modest skirt.

Om in C 

Although Pluma Blanca was born 114 years on this planet earlier than when I met him, he was a perfect child who always liked to share his toys with me. This little Indian always radiates joy, at least when he isn’t scolding people. On one of our first meetings he just looks at me and mentally says, “first go into silence, hear Om in breathlessness and then take note of its tone.” I could hear the Om sound vibrating within and it seemed to correspond something close to the tone of C. I got my flute out and played a C and it sounded like I was playing at the same tone as the sacred Om sound that was resounding around my pineal gland. Later he said, “Now hear it in C-sharp.” My head went back and I started to lose contact with the outside world and be absorbed into a great white silence that the Om at C-sharp was taking me into.

When I came back down he said, “now what is in your mind?” I closed my eyes and saw so many images and histories and stories flash before my mind. He continued: “You will verify all of this in the next few years. It will all come to pass.”

These events indeed are coming to pass, like entries in an apocalyptic diary. It was the saddest story ever conceived, although the story should soon change for the better. My friend could see the future and help his friends to do the same. Spiritual experiences like this don’t happen so regularly as it is too powerful of an experience for most to digest. The present is challenging enough without knowing the future. Ignorance is sometimes a blessing, but Pluma Blanca knew that it was necessary to understand these things.

 Nahuatl 

Pluma Blanca once told me that a Nahuatl is a healer that sees not just into the minds of animals but also into those of humans. Beyond even seeing into the souls of humans the true Nahuatl sees into the Oversoul, the conscious substatum that unites us all. He says that to enter a human mind is usually more difficult and dangerous than entering into a mind of an animal. Humans are less innocent and their mental contents may make such a rare and pure entity as a Nahuatl ill if he or she resonates too close with other human emotional turmoil. Animals see us as gods and naturally resonate with and reflect the mental states of their gods. The nahuatl prefers to see the mere reflection of a human’s problems by “hacking” the minds of the animals under their care. That way, the contact with the other human mind is not too direct and doesn’t affect the seer and also the minds of those seen into. Also,people often feel strangely transparent and often uncomfortable when they feel that another can see through them. Animals, like innocent children, may give very truthful and unbiased information and just tell it like it is. Although a dog can’t speak, they reflect most of this human resonance unconsciously and what lives and vibrates in the mind of the master is also there in the mind of the canine disciple. A nahuatl may learn many things about you through your dog, horse, or even donkey!

It has been said that very developed tantric yogis have the power of mind over matter in that whatever they put their focused, disciplined minds on will certainly materialize. Though quite rare, there have been numerous examples of yogis with these bizarre qualities through the ages.

One day Pluma Blanca (White Feather) came to visit bon Nadie at Rancho el Misterio. He spoke much of this phenomenon with practical examples. He said that developed shaman really can even have some degree of control over the weather. This amazed bon Nadie the most as Pluma Blanca was so calm and unsensational while speaking about these abilities. Rather, he took these truths very seriously. He always warned about these abilities, however. “What if you lose control of an emotion and end up manifesting your deepest shadow tendencies?,” he said. He was 110 years old and never spent much time in the cities but he really did understand modern people. The most amazing and diffult thing to believe is when he told bon Nadie that Nahuatls (those who enter the minds of animals) are real and that they can look into the Oversoul of humanity and into the Divine Eye that sees past, present, and future. They can see all minds, not just those of animals.  He said that it is nice to see a human mind from time to time, but he mostly just sees animal minds in human form.

On the way back south, bon Nadie took him to a store to buy some food for the trip. It was an elite part of town. Most people had skin the same color of bon Nadie’s. However, instead of the usual ignorance or normal sociability toward his person, he noticed that some people gave him nasty, scornful looks. They looked even worse at Pluma Blanca. Bon Nadie remained still, just looking back at them. He was in a light, dreamy trance  and saw so much bad history, impunity, suffering and hateful prejudice behind these people’s expressions. He was angry at their ideas and where they come from but still couldn’t judge these superficial people, except to say that they are superficial people.

One woman was particularly rude and pushed him to the edge of his patience. She thought that bon Nadie was one of her kind based on appearances. When he didn’t respond to her flirtations, she became downright spiteful and said under hear breath, “maldito indio” or “damned indian.” He wanted to respond and say:  “because my heart is the same as my friends, then I too am a damned indian.” However, Pluma Blanca came over laughing and pulled him out of the store. “Let your wife pay, we will wait out here,” he said. I knew that he knew I was a little annoyed. He sait quietly for several minutes and then responded: “They will get their lessons very soon.” Now Pluma Blanca was known as an oracle and I wasn’t sure if he was speaking about the future of the world and all of the racists and imperialists or if he was talking about this one woman in particular.

At that moment the racist woman came out of the store and Pluma Blanca began to giggle like a small child. It was as if he had done something naughty and was trying to hide it. A stray dog approached the woman, raised his leg, and soaked her stockings.

### Non-Dualism Cures All Disease

I have a friend, a recluse yogi, who has the ability to heal any disease. He is still alive, but considering the state of collective insanity on the planet, that could very well change. These big brothers have too much burden to carry right now. So that a little dharmic, moral order can begin to influence human society again, there must first be some major cleansing. He says that people trapped in the human, materialistic urban matrices are becoming physically and mentally ill due to the inability to harmonize their physical, mental, and spiritual strata of existence with society, nature, the planet and the universe. This recluse friend doubts if modern humans really are fit to continue evolving on this planet. His opinion matters because to me because I have seen him heal many incurable diseases simply by looking at somebody. These people healed aren't patients because he isn't a healer, at least he doesn't consider himself one. They are just people who happen to cross his path at the opportune time. I dare not give away his identity or his whereabouts because the people would devour him with their troubles.

He sees all illness as a projection of mental conflicts or imbalances. By intuitively seeing the illness as distorted thoughts or repressed emotions such as fear, anger, or insecurity, he sees how this flow of mental energy interacts with the organs and glands of the body. Maybe this person can't tell you so much scientifically about the immune system, T4 cells, etc., but he has been known to heal cancer. Maybe one can't empirically verify how he does it but it is easy to verify that the cancer disappeared. As a close friend, I ask him how he does it. He doesn't give away many secrets if one isn't first capable of understanding them, but one thing I have gathered is that he has some way of taking these illnesses into his own being, like the classic “sin eaters.” Perhaps the cancer of one person gives him diarrhea for a few days, or AIDS makes him physically weak for a few weeks. His advanced meditation and yoga practice constantly heal him of these illnesses. If he stops meditating or spends too much time in the city with the mundane, then he gets ill.

What he shared with me is that all illnesses are clusters of unprocessed, unconscious thoughts and emotions that attack the physical body by first creating imbalances in the glandular system. For him not to have the same illness, he must process the thoughts and emotions of the other as if they were his own. If he doesn't understand these mental patterns behind the illness, then his physical body suffers the same symptoms as the afflicted. I can't get him to tell me how he does it exactly. He is smug in his non-dualist philosophy and simply says that there is only one being in the universe and this being is only understood by the unprejudiced, tranquil and insightful minds. By understanding this fundamental truth, the mind becomes free of all complexes and relieves the body of having to bear the cross of all of the ego's ignorance and unconsciousness that create illness and disharmony. He really can explain a little more, but prefers to let people figure it out for themselves.

### Form And Formless

“Brahma alone is the guru.” This saying from the Upanishad represents a very universal conception of the deity. Brahma literally means that which is great and makes others great. In other words, Brahma is the Consciousness of the Macrocosm, of the entire universe. The guru is none other than the Supreme Consciousness and cannot be tainted by partiality nor prejudices nor any relative projection of a messiah or human guru. What is, simply is. If the Supreme Consciousness can create this entire universe, then surely there is an unmediated, direct way to communicate with me, a little microcosm in this Macrocosm. "Am I a secluded figure, in the vast, a little ameagre? No no no no I am not alone, the great is with me."

And one could imagine that such a Macrocosmic deity is not a petty god of a certain country or class or society of exclusive human beings that deserve his mercy. The tiny little human microcosmic mind with its prejudices and attachments finally understands that “god” is not to be found through any finite form, material nor mental. The sacred books and messiahs and Buddhas were just approximations of a an inner, mystical truth. Only those who dare question the root of their being free of these appendages could possibly find the root of their being free of all relative conditioning. Non-dualism, or Advaita, is the idea that ultimately the consciousness of the individual microcosm and the Macrocosm are fundamentally the same. This is not to say that my consciousness has become the consciousness of the universe, that the ego becomes god. Rather, my consciousness has been taken into, accepted, transformed, digested, and finally assimilated into the living, working consciousness of the Macrocosm or Brahma. The microcosm is no longer a separate entity creating negative reactions and contaminating the world while fleeing from one empty dream to the next. The illumined microcosm is a mental cell unified with other mental cells that form a Macrocosm, a collective body of minds. Here, one can't bring attachments, prejudices, nor any other petty ego control issue. The moment they arise, the Macrocosm knocks you off of your feet. It takes much time and evolution and trial and error to find a flow of unity into the Macrocosm. One must unlearn the socially-conditioned and indoctrinated ego along with all of its hereditary mental and biological instincts in order to learn the ways of Brahma.

Only those born with developed intuitive faculties can understand these truths without following teachers or paths. Life just somehow teaches these inner lessons. I suspect that these minds are “primed” with this knowledge from birth and that it was probably learned earlier. Plato saw all knowledge as something that has already been learned. What we experience here in the finite world are recollections of truths already known. Genius, according to this view, is nothing more than having at one's disposal what has already been learned. Spiritual orientation is innately developed in some just as art or music or mathematics is innately developed in others.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">The idea of a human guru or a spiritual teacher is to help one understand these fundamental cardinal truths of non-dualism. A guru is one who has walked that path and is capable of showing it to others. However, most of the time, a concept of guru is but an opiate for a desperate personality separated from the life of the universe due to its ignorance and egoism. Belief is mostly desperate compulsion and the idea of a guru is often a 2-edged sword. Normally, when people speak to you about gurus they want to sell you on some idea. They often want others to bandy together with them under some omnipotent messiah, guru, and their religion or institution. They don't really want to have their own experiences but prefer just to adopt the ideas and traditions of others to find security and refuge. The more absolute the idea, the more effective is the opiate and the more placated is the compulsion of the fearful and separate little ego to grasp on to some form of meaning

If one works through these limited ideas of a guru, then perhaps one can really understand something of another human being that is wise and compassionate and only has your well-being in mind.

I came to believe that Anandamurti was a true guru. I never met him in physical form. I was convinced of his special character because of his disciples. These exceptional human beings considered Anandamurti as their guru and that naturally gives one a certain reverence toward their teacher. There was once a Sufi teacher who knew of Anandamurti and respected him greatly. He sent one of his disciples to see him. The disciple went to see him but only saw an absurd show of dogmatic followers running about in an absurd guru-devotee show. The master rebuked him and told him he was only judging external appearances. What he should have seen is that the master (Anandamurti) was so great that he accepted all people, even clowns.

Fortunately, I made it past the show of spiritual salesmen and was able to meet some of the more mature disciples of Anandamurti, both monastic and lay. In general, the community of Ananda Marga was very respectable. There were people from all strata of society working and moving together under the inspiration of Anandamurti. The problems mostly resided with the monastic institution after the death of Anandamurti. The more mature meditators didn't have any doubts about the divinity of their teacher but were never dogmatic about it nor tried to impose it on others. They put their meaning in doing practical work and sincere spiritual practice. Near these mature disciples one could feel a certain lightness and expansion of mind that helps one to realize that the guru is deep within, inside of one's deepest sense of peace. This influence made meditation much clearer and peaceful. It seemed impossible to cling to any form of teacher when one feels at one with the living Macrocosm of Brahma. I began to see an inner light that radiated into every form that entered my mind. I saw the same spirit both within and without. I became certain that I was not my body nor my mind and so how was it possible to cling to some human guru form? However, none of these elder teachers ever tried to impose this form upon me and the stories that I well tell of them will hopefully help other people appreciate the philosophy and spiritual practices of Anandamurti.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">When I first arrived at Ananda Nagar I met a yogi who told me some very useful secrets. He immediately took me into his confidence. He looked at me intensely and I felt like I was being scanned. The first thing he told me was a tip of how to transmute sexual energies. I had never heard a monk talk about things so openly, yet with such intelligence and purity. Far from being perverse or hypocritical fantasies of a celibate monk, it was the most practical insight into desire that I had heard of in my life. As a young single man I greatly appreciated his insights. The second important thing he told me is that some day Ananda Marga will probably end up killing their own saints. He laughed heartily but he was serious. It was inconceivable to me at the time. Furthermore, it seemed like heresy because everybody else was only talking how great Ananda Marga was and how Anandmurti left all of his power and grace in this organization! Now, 20 years later, I see what he meant.

Later, on another visit, he told me how yogis can leave their bodies and travel through the inner dimensions of time and space. He said it was another reality in which there exist not these relative factors of time and space. It was a Dreamland that was even more real than physical reality, a kind of astral repository of all human experience and memory-past, present and future. He said that you could know whatever you needed to know and meet whoever you needed to meet on this plane of reality. I was eager to visit this Hall of the Immortals. He told me how to leave my body and at what time of night I could do it. I left the conversation with a desire to see if I could somehow know something of the teacher of these great men that I was meeting and was inspired by. Later that night I followed the prescribed technique. Nothing happened at that moment. Later I slept and then it started to work. I awoke completely with a holy jolt of spiritual lightning in my spine. I could feel the kundalini rising. I could feel it swishing through the cerebral spinal fluid that was concentrating inside the brain. When it entered inside the head there was only light and sound, every color was within white and every sound within Om. All through the night there was a whirling vortex of energy moving around the crown of my head. It had no form, just sound and color. I was entirely awake but the more the kundalini rose the more I entered into a very conscious state of trance. It was more real than anything I had ever experienced. Rather than a world with forms and mass, all was very fine and soothing vibration. I understood how the crown chakra and the pineal gland were the microcosmic receptor and channel to enter into the formless, infinite Macrocosm. Everything made sense as pure idea. There was no fear or uncertainty of this unknown reality. All was bliss and I felt quite free and pure. I realized that my body was lying on my bed in a trance but that my consciousness was very clearly in the Present without names and forms. Every once in a while I would see the form of Anandamurti and the whole vibrational scene would turn into something more like a dream, only much more real and lucid. I thought “this is a dream”, but I knew it was a very special sort of dream. I still to this day recall it just as clear as a “waking” state of consciousness.

To this day I am still trying to realize the significance of these detailed conversations with the guru apparition. Perhaps it wasn't absolutely necessary for him to appear as a human to another human in a state of lucid dream, but it was a very personal and affective touch from something or someone very sublime. As the years pass by these revelations become even clearer and life makes more sense. There was only so much I could understand as a little spiritual fledgling in my early twenties. They were experiences that by their very nature need a full life-time to be realized. Although I have never preached or tried to convince others about the divinity of Anandamurti, I have never ever doubted this influence in my life. For so many years I didn't even speak of him. It was a subtle struggle of reconciling form with formlessness, and the idea that the guru archetype may actually appear with a human form. I always considered the latter as a relative possibility and never wanted my experiences to be some kind of “proof” for the ego to make fixed ideas about the infinite. This is a subtle error that causes great damage to an otherwise pure ideology, whether it is one's personal set of ideas or the ideology of a spiritual society. If mystery, subtlety, and free speculationare substituted by concreteness and conformity, then only dogma will remain. Human beings armed with exclusive ideas always end up creating trouble for themselves and others. I always try to refer to Anandamurti's philosophical ideas that the Supreme Consciousness is infinite and formless. With those who tried to impose the absolute form of the guru, I only saw religion in the making and soon learned that there was no sense arguing these matters. Over the years I have taught formless meditation with an entirely different system to others without referring to Anandamurti yet many of my students continue to have similar profound experiences and dreams of Anandamurti. It is something that only continues to grow silently inside of me and others. He himself only said that he was, is, and will remain a mystery. However, the philosophy he left is very clear, rational and lucid. I hope others find something special in his works that I am sharing. They were compiled as books, but all of them are based on talks that he gave over several decades to thousands of people.

### My Bodhisattva Candidates

Spiritual vision through the medium of mental forms is truly a form of divine grace. It is a certain illumination and showering of elevated thought and feeling that is designed by deep Intelligence to guide us onward and inward. Form helps us eventually understand the formless, the quiet I-Witness that is always now. Mystical vision is more than mere knowledge. Through it, knowledge is conveyed but in the most beautiful and meaningful manner. One could never throw such an experience away; each time it is recalled one gets the original message and merges into silent peace and joy.

I think Tarkovsky was the most mystical “image poet” of modern times in that he really could convey deep mystical ideas through cinematic form. When I see the last scenes of “Stalker” or “Solaris” I am deeply moved into an ecstatic reverie and marvel over the experience for hours, amazed that his genius could express something I always considered beyond expression. That is true poetry. However, even this beauty is really only an interpretation, and therefore limitation, of inner vision, which is always ineffable. Great mystic artists give just a little bit of what they inwardly see. Even Tarvovsky’s art pales in comparison to the truest, sincere vision of even the most humble mind. The kingdom of heaven is truly within and actively seeks prepared minds in its mysterious, inexhaustible variety of manifestations.

The other day I woke up just before dawn, I sat up in bed and even before I began to do a little meditation, I felt a strange vibration on the right side of my head. Inwardly, I looked at it and felt it and saw so very clearly in my mind’s eye a very gentle and friendly human form. I recognized him. I knew that this was all going on in the “Magic Theatre” within so I asked this apparition what he was doing here. No reply, just friendly, loving silence. I reflected and thought “Yes, I know why you are here. Your humanism moved me deeply and awakened something very profound but I have almost forgotten its origins and how it came to me in this life. Your Dr. Rieux in “The Plague” asked if it were possible to be a saint even if there were no god. He sacrificed everything for the well-being of others, yet he didn’t even believe in god. I always suspected this of you, that you could never put your compassion under a popular concept of what we call “god.” Those that didn’t grasp your depth called you an “Existentialist.” The actual human experience of compassion was something so much more than confusing, corrupt concepts. You initiated me into silent Buddha compassion before I even became familiar with Buddhist teachings. I suspect that many others were also helped by you, gentle angel who descended into the “absurd,” the 20th century. Is this where you are now, in this ethereal space, stimulating neurons of the incarnated so that we don’t forget love? Do you dwell within the universal spirit, are you just a memory within the collective mind of humanity still bound to this dusty earth, or just an apparition of my idiosyncrasies trying to make sense of themselves?” The apparition remains silent.

The form disappears and I feel that same gentle pulsation that was in the left side of my head move into the right side of the chest, into the Spiritual Heart. Through the Spiritual Heart, mind rises high into a very fine light that surrounds the planet, a subtle, diaphanous spiritual atmosphere, I look down upon my valley from so high in this ethereal space. Unlike being in a plane or balloon and resisting gravity, everything is weightless and the forms are of pure light. The only movements are pulsations of thought and feeling. He came and showed me his perspective, how he sees things, how the “dead” gaze upon us, and then returned into the formless. The rocks of the mountains were just reflections of thought, all is sentient and made of light. Life is inherent in all things. I could vaguely see human faces taking form out of the mountain rocks. They are rough, turgid and unrefined like Neanderthals but an invisible force keeps loving them beyond time and form, purifying and refining them into something greater, beautiful and yet to be completed. An immense love looks down upon the planet and waits for all life forms to manifest and evolve spirit, slowly.

So was Camus a symbol or a bodiless mind that came to me? It doesn’t matter. All phenomenal experiences of the mind, even the most spiritual visions, are at best maps and guides, friendly nudges from the universe to go here or there, or not to. The meaning of the vision is what is important. To feel at one with the earth, as I did in this experience, is something so profound that even though I write the vision of Camus off as an hallucination, the inner meaning of the experience is indelibly pressed upon my mind and I could never deny its beauty and sublimity. The vision inspires great feelings, perhaps something akin to what the bodhisattvas feel. Microvita are sentient intelligences that exist in the finer, mental planes of reality. They have many qualities and manifest through various forms of human nobility, valor, genius, and love. Did Camus express compassion or did Compassion express Camus? For the non-dualist there really is no difference. All souls are just sparks from the eternal fire of Brahma. These bodiless microvita guide the evolution of consciousness in all beings on the planet and even help shape our thoughts and feelings. This physical world really is a reflection of the inner workings of spirit. Imagination is the key to higher realities, and as Tagore noted, that with more imagination, the less imaginary something is.

### Neem Tree and Flute Tantra

<em>O yogi, sit in lotus under the sacred neem and together make impenetrable conscious force with nature. The death troopers will receive a great blessing from your practice. Infinite, white burning light penetrates and ignites their darkness. An immediate reaction shakes their world. Those who dealt so much terror may die in terror of Mother Kali, protector of the planet and of yogis. The next embryo they inhabit will finish its recapitulation with gills and fins. There they will “swim in idle waters and drink other fishes piss.</em>

Not many people understood the context of these phrases when I published them with this photo last year. It was a very dark time and I remembered a very dark punk rock song from my youth about reincarnation and how Oedipus complex-ridden perverts are reborn as fish. I never thought anything useful would come out of those memories but I realized that they were quite insightful! The narco death soldiers had just returned to the valley. They had come and gone several times in the last few years. Their soldiers get killed off regularly and there were always new ones ready to come and inhabit their nearby camp. There they keep hostages and then kill them and throw their bodies in the mountains.  I welcomed them back with a solo of Gluck's “Dance of the Blessed Spirits” on my kena bamboo flute. I finished and they returned the message with gunfire. “Okay, now you all want some of my oboe too?”

I truly felt protected and I didn’t worry. At first, I saw it as an ideational, meditative stance to create a protective field around our territory so as to keep their evil away. “As you think, so you become,” say the yogis. I won’t even consider it a possibility that they harm us, and so they won't. However, as I continued to play and further pound them with Gluck and Bach, I realized that I was probably playing requiems for their upcoming departure from the planet. I thought of how those boys were probably forced into the paramilitary part of the cartel and they probably weren’t that different from the rest of the youth in the area. Human beings will do almost anything under forced coercion, at any time and any place. Soldiers hardly ever really know what they fight for. These boys are dying in a war insidiously designed to make Mexicans kill Mexicans while the gringos continue to rob their country blind. The plan is to let the locals do the raping and pillaging while the imperialists purposely take advantage of this situation.

After this realization, I played music for them not so much to scare them but to try to send these poor souls something beautiful. If they really are like the youth in this area, then they probably have suffered many deprivations and have never really felt much human warmth and compassion. There are very few nuclear families and almost all heads of the household are alcoholics. There are almost no opportunities for these outcasts. However, the system has designed a strategy to get rid of them and make money selling arms and drugs in the process.
They had already entered the ranch on a few occasions in the past. They are used to people being afraid of them. However, we decided to reprimand them. They were terrified. They said they heard voices in their heads and wanted to leave. They said they would give us their protection. “No thank you,” was the reply.

I don’t recommend this technique unless one is very fearless and has a really strong mantra! When confronting evil forces that could easily destroy one’s physical being, one’s only protection is innocence and purity. There is fear because there are impurities. We don’t yet fully understand that we belong to immortality and so we attach our identity to some notion of worldly temporality. <em>Sadhana</em> or meditation burns away the impurities and leads one to a natural state of innocence, at one with nature and spirit. “Who’s universe is this anyway, by what right do these narcos, their narco state and puppet governors have to wield this terror upon us?”

Circumstances have given me proof time and again that the only true protection in this world is to be at one with dharma, the moral order of the universe. “Those who protect dharma are protected by dharma.” Dharma is not about beliefs or religion but rather getting to the essence of things by deep contemplation and then know how to react to the situation from this pinnacled, illuminated perspective.

If for some reason I can’t concentrate in meditation, then a little spiritual music or kiirtan always helps. Instead of letting the mind be conditioned by terrible information coming from the world of men and their media, one surrenders to dharma, the silent and natural flow of events in the universe. One can truly feel the harmony of nature and spirit and that the force of <em>dharma</em>, the conscious force of nature whose only purpose is to serve what is pure and innocent. The best meditation is that which is totally surrendered to Brahma; one desires nothing but simply enjoys being at one with Brahma, the supreme entity. Similarly, the best music is that which is played with spiritual devotion. While in meditation or playing music under the neems or the nearby ceiba tree one totally gets lost in spiritual ideation. With music and meditation along with the protection of the neems and ceiba, one can do the necessary work and create a spiritually-protected atmosphere. To always feel that the Supreme Entity is near and dear, is always loving and looking over, dissipates all fear.

### The Divine Mother

The year before last was at the height of this so-called narco war in Northern Mexico. The narcos controlled the whole region and the local village. There was a command center 2 kilometers from our home where there were human skulls hung on the fence. Many of the local men were hired as lookout scouts to inform them if there was going to be an attack. The people in the village were very destitute and poor. Many families had inadequate food and clothing while the men spent their money on beer or crack.

Rancho Misterio began organizing some social service activities in the community. We even organized a mass with a very good Catholic Father in which the chanting of Baba Nam Kevalam was incorporated into a mass which the father gave. Giitanjali continued to take our crew to sing kiirtan twice a week with the community members. I usually stayed behind in the ranch with the heavy artillery in deep meditation and confident that nothing evil could befall my family. During that time the locals would pray to the Virigin of Guadalupe before and after singing kiirtan. During those times my meditation was so full of beautiful Christian ideas. I felt so closely the divine, motherly aspect of the divinity. She never appeared as a form, but rather the love that fills all space between all of the stars of the universe. At that time I realized the Virgin of Guadalupe has a shawl bedecked with stars and that the image is really a mix between an indigenous goddess and the Virgin Mary. I never really knew much of Catholicism personally but always knew many very good Catholic people. In my own way I had many internal apparitions and it was nice to feel like I understood the underlying meaning of the Divine Mother behind this image.

At that same time, there was an apparition of the Virgin of Guadalupe over the village. Everybody who wasn't drunk saw it; that is, all of the women and maybe one or two of the men.
What I learned from this is that the divine cannot ultimately be trapped in any image but rather may use images to express deep truths.

### Possession

I saw the first images of carnage during the first Gulf War my last year in high school.  I was disgusted and ashamed. Although most of the teachers and leaders in society were supporting the government propaganda of a justified attack, there were also a few dissenters in the public school system who gave alternative views.  I had been influenced by one such teacher.  I really had no strong political views but I learned just enough of modern politics to entirely mistrust our government.  At the same time a giant boil appeared on my cheek.  It was enormous and swollen and very embarrassing.  As the fluid oozed out all I could think about were the images of the bodies of the hotel clerks in Bhagdad who were killed by misguided guided missiles.  I was ashamed to be an American.  No more John Wayne and heroic Green Berets saving the day; just filthy rotten imperialists and duped, flag-waving morons robbing and murdering weaker societies for their natural resources.  Well, for several years at least I vacillated between that extreme definition of my countrymen or the definition that they are also victims exploited by bad education and capitalist pseudo-culture. Either way, fascism always ends up taking hold of empires in the end.

I saw the first images of carnage from the first Gulf War during my last year in high school.  I was disgusted and ashamed.  Although most of the teachers and leaders in society were supporting the government propaganda of a justified attack, there were also a few dissenters in the public school system who gave alternative views.  I had been influenced by one such teacher.  I really had no strong political views but I learned just enough of modern politics to entirely mistrust our government.  At the same time a giant boil appeared on my cheek.  It was enormous and swollen and very embarrassing.  As the fluid oozed out all I could think about were the images of the bodies of the hotel clerks in Bhagdad who were killed by misguided guided missiles.  I was ashamed to be an American.  There was no more John Wayne and heroic Green Berets saving the day; just filthy rotten imperialists and duped, flag-waving morons robbing and murdering weaker societies for their natural resources.  Well, for several years at least I vacillated between that extreme definition of my countrymen or the idea that they are also victims exploited by bad education and capitalist pseudo-culture.  Either way, fascism always ends up taking hold of empires just before their demise.


During the second invasion of Iraq in the spring of 2003 the boil returned in exactly the same place.  It was like a malevolent spirit that still haunted me.  I was no longer ashamed of being an American because I had become a universal citizen by then.  I really saw us as no more different than the German population around the time of Hitler.  However, I still had those same feelings of disgust with the mindless American populace that unwittingly goes along with the plans of the military industrial complex, bankers and politicians that make all of this profitable war business and propaganda possible.  More than just a rebellious attitude against authority, it was rather an attitude that these worms have no right to inflict this terror on any human being, especially when the justifications for aggression are based on crude lies.

I had just moved to Mexico in 2003 and met a young couple who were very concerned about the war.  They were intelligent, educated, and had a very humanistic outlook.  They had a new-born baby at the time and were a very happy family. However, they were horrified at how the United States was so blatantly pulling off this scheme that any reasonable intelligent person unbiased by Fox or CBS could clearly see through.    The wife seemed to be deeply affected by the of war and was becoming even more so as time went on.  Although I don't think they were actively protesting in the streets, I did hear of them attending some social and ceremonial gatherings of a pacific nature.  Slowly she began to become depressed and withdrawn.  Nobody heard from her anymore.  There was a Summer Solstice meditation event soon afterwards in which we heard from other friends that she had become very depressed, would not talk to anybody and was hardly even interested in caring for her baby.  Her husband was very worried and did not understand what was happening to her.  

She arrived and gave a faint smile to everyone.  I hardly recognized her.  There seemed to be nobody at home.  My wife took her into a back room of the clinic away from all of the people participating in the festival in order to talk with her and give her some naturopathic treatments.  I could see her husband was very concerned and was having to give a lot of time helping to care for the baby.  

About an hour later I was called back into the room.  My wife asked me to touch the crown of her head.  She asked me if I could feel something strange.  I did so and felt a terrible, evil presence.  It was similar to the feeling I had with my boil but much, much stronger.  I knew that this was an evil too powerful to be coming from her.  It was like a giant, super-personal plasma blob of evil that was in the room.  I felt sick and went into the next room to lie down.  Ten minutes later my wife came in and said her patient was feeling much better.  By that time I had already begun to decipher what was affecting her.  My wife saw that I was abnormal and asked me if I absorbed something.  I replied that I believe I had.  My heart was pounding as if I had run a marathon.  I could distinctly feel another presence inside of me.  I had never felt like there was some other being existing inside me before.  Yes, maybe I had had some strange experiences with deeper parts of my existence but it was always an experience with the various aspects of my own self.  My wife immediately lost her non-attachment as a healer and began to worry about me.  She wanted to take me to the hospital, which was quite ironic because she always “stole” patients from hospitals before the butchers took people's organs out.  She was crying and begging me not to die.  I laughed and told her to shut up because I am fighting for my life with all of my force and the last thing I need is for my doctor to say I am going to die!

I lied there all night listening to the suggestions of this dark entity.  I knew it was either it or I that would be alive in the morning.  Fortunately, my life was very full and vibrant and I didn't accept any of the suggestions from this evil.  It was like a pattern that simply made everything negative and distorted-  pessimistic and destructive thoughts, hateful feelings, while at the same time it siphoned the life out of the body.  It was a contest to see which mental pattern would control this body, the evil plasma or my own conscience.  I could now understand very well what was affecting our friend and her family.  

After a few hours I recovered a little.  The woman had fallen asleep and I went to speak with her husband.  I was exhausted but said that I believe everything will now be alright.  He seemed a little relieved.  I awoke with a terrible headache.  It stayed with me a week or so while this presence was being digested.  In the meantime the family learned meditation and we spent much time with the baby and all was alright.  It was the most terribly illuminating experience I had ever had up until that point in my life.  It was the beginning of a live microvita study that has only gotten wilder as the years pass on.

### The Tree Tantra

In the Tantra that I learned, Raja Di Raja Yoga, the techniques were very effective in awakening the kundalini. I began to enter the breathless state of samadhi very regularly when I was 23 years old. Although very intense, the practices gave the mind and body the maximum amount of transformation biologically, psychologically, and spiritually possible. However, nobody ever effectively taught me how to bring the kundalini back down. For years I was like a machine working at accelerated capacity. Sometimes I would go into trances while driving and my friend would have to grab the wheel. I would sometimes swoon and fall down while in a spiritual mood. My body once leaped 2 feet into the air when the kundalini awakened while I was sitting in the lotus posture. I cannot jump anywhere near that high in lotus if I try with my best effort and even when using my knees to bounce. This constant rising of the kundalini in me effected others as well, mostly for the good, but also negatively as well.

I was immediately rejected from my yoga society after people knew I was having these experiences. I was told on several occasions by several monastics that I wanted those high samadhi states of realization, then I was in the wrong organization. At first I thought this was absurd. I had only done the practices that they had taught me. Samadhi, spiritual trance, is supposed to happen when the kundalini awakens after sincere practice. It would probably have been alright with them if they had these experiences. Many talked about my experiences much more than I ever did within their gossip circles. They finally admitted my experiences were real, but said that I would die before age 40 because of their intensity. Far from being a complement, they also wished more mundane misfortunes on me as well! I felt like I was the lowest creature on the planet for a little while. While receiving divine bliss on the inside, I received so much hatred from without. There was absolutely no possibility of developing an inflated ego out of these experiences because I was constantly negated by the slanderous talk about me. Later, I did realize that I was in the wrong society. I knew I wasn’t perfect but I wasn’t the narcissistic person that they made me out to be. “What Peter says about Paul says more about Peter than it does about Paul,” I realized. I left these practices entirely. The people who taught me them hated me with such intensity that I felt tremendous pain in my head each time I tried to meditate with their system. It was as if they had suspended my access to Spirit through their channels. Fine, that gave me an opportunity to find out what Tantra is really like, independent of dogmatic religious groups. However, I have always held great reverence to the  teachers that I met who really understood their own practices. If I would not have met these few exceptions, then I would consider my time with this society as a prison sentence.

I left the shelter of a spiritual society without knowing how to bring the kundalini back down, or at least to not be so intense and to remember that this process will probably kill me if it doesn’t calm down. My renunciation of this society was a great blessing, afterall. I realized that people liked me again, despite that I had these strange phenomenon occurring within me. I always felt liked and accepted for most of my existence and I feel that this social acceptance gave me the confidence to be okay with myself and begin to explore new territories of inner being. I felt more at home in a hardware store than in a closed-minded spiritual society.

My meditation experiences came back with even more intensity and originality. I gradually developed my own system of practice. Throughout these years I never stopped having dreams of Anandamurti in which he always told me very interesting clues. He never gave anything away, but rather just guided me towards the understanding of spiritual practice. I realized that I didn’t even need to meditate anymore but that Anandamurti continued to give me experiences that would deepen my understanding of meditation. It has been a great adventure.

During this time, I became friends with Pluma Blanca, a Mayan yogi from Campeche. On our first meetings he shared his insights about the Tree Tantra. He always sat in meditation under the ceiba tree. It reminded me of how Anandamurti said that it is good to meditate under the neem tree.

One takes the tree as a symbol for meditation while at the same time taking actual shelter under the tree and participating with its shield of electromagnetic<wbr /> energy while meditating.  According to Mayan mystics "nothing evil can happen while under the ceiba."  The upward force growing out of the earth helps awaken the kundalini while the downward force of converting air into mass and developing deep roots into the earth helps bring the kundalini back down. Mind must fly upward toward the spirit but also must return to the earth, at least for as long as one is on this earth. Just like the Indian Yogis, Pluma Blanca said that a yogi completes his spiritual practice by bringing the kundalini back down, from the crown and back down into the spiritual heart. This gives a base for the mind mid-way along the spinal column. One can be joyfully engaged in existence here while remaining in a subtle state of being while at the same time keep oneself grounded and in the body. Like the great ceiba tree, one extends high into the heavens while also rooting oneself deep into the earth. Unchecked kundalini force will eventually liberate you but it can kill your body if not careful. One gets attached to spiritual bliss and experiences but must know how to balance them out. It is better to save that intensity for when it is really time to leave all work and thereby the physical body, and never before then. Like the Upanishad says, “Desire to live 100 years while working in joyful unity with Brahma.”

### A Few Stories of Dada Iishvarakrsnananda

Dada Iishvarakrsnananda or "Dada I.K." was my meditation and yoga teacher when I was in Ananda Marga. He was the most humane and friendly person I have ever known. I continue to admire his moral courage and feel that his sincerity, discernment, and pure intentions are a great inspiration for many. 

This is a story he wrote the other day. Its setting is in an intense political atmosphere in India after Anandamurti had refused to stop speaking about PROUT, a decentralized economic theory that he propounded. The communists in the West Bengal state government are attacking Anandamurti and killing his followers while at the same time the Federal, pro-capitalist government is also trying to ban his social activity. PROUT was too transcendental for both the commie state and the Federal pro-capitalist governments and Anandamurti was getting flack from both the Right as well as the Left. Anandamurti's institution, Ananda Marga Pracaraka Samgha, was later infiltrated by the CBI (which is like the CIA, only Indian). Many of his closest disciples betrayed him while others, like my friend Iishvarakrsnananda, went to jail in his teenage years for refusing to renounce these ideas even though he would have been given a presidential pardon and release for doing so. Many of his friends were brutally tortured and he himself almost died in jail but never renounced his principles. I have never known men with such clarity of purpose as I have known in Dada I.K.

"I Still Love Them".  -Acarya Iishvarakrsnanada Avadhuta

Once Baba asked me if I had any questions. I had a question in my mind that had haunted me for around 15 years or more. But I was always afraid to talk to Baba. Either I forget that question or I was too afraid to talk whenever I met Baba personally. The question was not very good. But that day Baba was in very very happy mood and told me that I can ask any question to Him. I got some courage to ask the question. The question has made me very angry and upset. For some time I would jump out of the bed due to anger and hatred towards some sanyasi dadas who went against Baba and put Him in Jail. Sometimes my blood was boiling with anger.

I told Baba: "I went to Jail before you went to jail." At the time I was taking care Baba's quarter in 1971 in Ranchi. I was LFT (Local Full-time Worker) at that time. I was also Baba's body guard. When Baba left for Patna after Ananda purnima Dharma maha chakra I was travelling with Baba to Patna by security jeep. However, in last minute I was asked to take care of Baba's quarters in Ranchi along with a few other volunteers. So I came down from the Jeep . It was very painful for me to be separated from Baba. After a month of the departure of Baba the police arrested 33 Margis (members of Ananda Marga), LFTs and WTs (Whole Time workers), all on false charges. Madhvananda and 14 other sanyasi dadas were with us during the arrest.

My Question to Baba continued, "did the CBI did not know about you as Dharma guru? Those dadas had seen the power of spirituality, demonstration, and power of Taraka Brahma. Those dadas told me many spiritual stories about you. Those same Dadas went against you and made false accusations against you. When I think about those Dadas my blood boils with anger." When Baba listened to my words, He became totally peaceful. There was total silence. I never have felt such a silence in my life. It was total peace. He held my both of my hands for a long period. He remained in silence for quite a bit of time and then He told me that "I still love them."

All of my anger, hatred, and frustration was gone since that day. Baba used to say that Paramapurusa (Supreme Consciousness) cannot hate anyone. He repeated this several times in his talks: "Oh human being! what right do we have to hate anyone when almighty Taraka Brahma does not hate any one?"
Baba used to say that "you may like or dislike someone. But do not hate anyone." Baba was Parama Purusha, Taraka Brahma, and Satguru. Baba was a symbol of love. Baba is a symbol of love. Baba will be a symbol of love. Baba came here to flood the earth with love. Let all of His children work for spreading love. Love will unite us.



THE POWER OF MANTRA AND THE POWER OF GURU  Dada Iishvarakrsnananda

Yesterday I wrote about a saintly Grhii Acarya (Married, Family Teacher), Sakal Deva.
Today I am writing about a serious incident which forced him to join Ananda Marga.
Acaraya Sakal Deva Dada was a fearless person. He was lawyer by profession . His body was well built . I did not have a chance to see him in his younger adult age but even at the age of 90 he used to walk in an erect position. Before he was in Ananda Marga, people were a bit afraid of him. He was bit rough and tough with people. He was not afraid of any one or anything. One day he was walking on the road . He saw a person in a black robe. After seeing the person, he became afraid. He was haunted by fear day and night after that . He went to temples and other religious places to overcome his fear. The lawyer who was known as fearless in Muzaffarpur had become full of fear.

On one rainy day, he started to run and fell down and was knocked unconscious. Some so-called low cast people in Bihar saw him lying unconscious and brought him near a temple. Somehow these local people knew about Ananda Marga tantric meditation practice in that area. They told him that Ananda Marga meditation will help you. He got the address of an acarya and went to see him but he could not find him there. The family of the Acarya gave the address of another Grhi acarya. He visited him. The Grhi Acarya was very lean and thin person . He wanted to overcome fear at any cost. He wanted to learn meditation but he put some strict conditions on his Acarya. His first condition was that he loves to drink whisky every day. He must be allowed to drink whisky as he will die without drinking whisky. He also eats meat at every meal. He must be allowed to eat meat every day. I forgot his third demand. The Grhi Acarya was a bit nervous. Sakaldev dada told me that to overcome his fear he wanted to learn sadhana (meditation) even if he were to have to force the acharya to teach him if the acharya would not have agreed to teach willingly. He would have easily overpowered him because the acharya was so thin. He was adamant to learn meditation. Finally Sakaladeva dada was taught meditation.. The Family Acarya told him that you may drink your whisky and eat meat every day, but you must practice meditation twice a day as well.
In the Ananda Marga meditation system, the Guru teaches meditation and the acarya is just a medium. Now the job was taken over by the Guru. The power of his mantra started to work.
After few days of sincere practice of Sadhana as per instruction of his Acarya, he went to eat his meat. Afterward, he kept vomitiing and vomiting. The same thing happened with his desire for whisky. When he went to drink whisky he broke the bottle with his bare hands out of repulsion for the whisky.
He gave up eating meat and drinking whisky. He told me that when he went to court, he would always drink whisky before making arguments in the court.. Such was situation of Acarya Sakal Deva Dada before becoming a margii.. Acarya Sakaldeva Dada took the shelter of Varabahaya (the blessing of fearlessness from the guru) and all fear went away.



Spiritual Journey and Struggle: Part 3  -Dada Iishvarakrsnananda

We were a half dozen people in the training center. I was youngest of the trainees. We learned some basic philosophy, worker’s rules, etc. After the training we had to do SPT (Sadhana Piitha Training). We got a piece of cloth to wrap around us but no slippers, no shirt, no shoes.
We had to keep silence( Maona Brata) .We were not allowed to keep any money or any kind of possession. We were instructed to go to beg door to door in the morning and come back before noon. It was very hard thing for me; but I had no choice.

I used to go far away from the town; so that no known person should notice me.
One day I went very far away to the tribal village. I had collected some potatoes and rice. I used to utter 3 times “Hari Om Tat Sat” . If they gave me alms; I took them, otherwise, I moved to the next house. I was not supposed to talk and a say any words if some one asks me except “Hari Om Tat Sat” while I was begging.

One day I was walking on a road when I met a man. He wanted to talk to me, but I refused to talk with him. He continued and forced me to talk. I explained a little bit about Ananda Marga.
He told me that there is gathering where around 50 people are sitting.
“It will be nice if you come there and talk to them about your philosophy,” he told me.
I did not want to go there, but he forcefully persuaded me to go there. I was alone and there was no one else on the street. So I followed him.

When we arrived at the gathering people were sitting in a court yard and drinking tribal liquor and in the other side some ritual was going on. I wanted to leave the place and I told the person who had brought me there. He told me that he can not do anything as the Sardar ( head of the tribe) is responsible for this place. He told me to speak with the Sardar . I asked permission from head of tribe to leave. The Sardar told me that “you were brought here as a sacrifice to our Goddess. You can not leave this place.” I was surrounded by many people and I started to cry on the inside. The Dadas had told me that if there is any problem that I should use second lesson of meditation. I started to take second lesson, but the mantra did nothing. I was confused, but I did not cry. I was remembering Baba, but it did not work. I started to think that I will be killed and offered to the goddess and no one will know about it.

The complete memory of my life started to come back. Every one used to love me. All my family members were so close to me. For some time I was thinking about my father, sometimes about my mother, sometimes about my brothers, sisters, and sister-in-laws. Before becoming a Margii everyone loved me so much. I thought about my nephew and niece and how I used to play with them. I started to think that my family was right. I should not have joined Ananda Marga.

I will die and no one will know. No mantra, no Baba, no God was going to help me. I was a heart-broken man. Death without reason was meaningless. Every second I was thinking about death. I had lost all hope in God, Guru, Mantra, tantra. I was just thinking about my death every second.

I had reached there around 8 AM. Almost eight hours had passed there. They were chanting and sharping some axe and sword. I was watching and counting my time. Next they brought some home-made tribal liqueur called "handia".
I never had any kind of alcohol in my life. I refused it but they wanted to drug me. I was helpless. Four people came and some one held my hand, then some one opened my mouth and kept pouring liquor in my mouth. I did not know how many bottles they put inside me as I was half dead. They brought some rice to feed me but I refused, so again forcibly they put rice in my mouth and I somehow swallowed it.

It is impossible to express my feeling about this unwanted death as I had lost all hope.
I had some potatos in my begging bag. One person came and snatched my bag. He told me that he wanted to eat my potato. I gave it to him. Then somebody appeared out of nowhere. He told the man who was going to eat my potato: “do not touch that potato”. He further said: “do not take food from a beggar. This person may be saint, a swami, or god on the earth. If you take his things then I will smash your head.” The person who was going to take my potatos asked him: “who are you?” He replied: “that it is none of your business.” While this was going on a riot broke out. People were very drunk and they started to beat each other.

The unknown person who had appeared told me: “run away from here!,” but I had no energy to move. I was scared to death of the sharp axe and sword. The thought of death was moving through my head as they can kill me at any time. I did not move. The person again shouted: “run away from here!” In the end he came to me, grabbed my hand and we started to run. I was still afraid that they would follow me. We ran and ran until we came to the main road. This person told me: “Go, go to Baba.” Additionally, he said: “I will be here until you reach your place. If any one comes here I am going to chop off their heads one by one.”

It was almost dark when I reached my place. Dada Shyamananada was moving back and forth in front of Baba's gate. When he saw me he became very angry. He was very upset. He told me that Baba have not taken food and water since the morning. He has told them if his son does not come He will not eat and drink. I told Dada to go and tell Baba that I am back and that I will narrate the whole story.
He went to tell the news to Baba. After a few minutes Dada came back and told that the food and water which was for Baba has to be given to me. “That is instruction of Baba, there will be no prasad today,” Dada told me.I had wonderful meal. I once told this story to Baba when Baba had asked me how many times he has directly or indirectly helped me. This story was written during Baba’s life in Hindi and later translated into English.



I GAVE THAT POWER ONLY TO YOU narrated by Dada Iishvarakrsnananda

I had written in a previous story that Baba had given power to Dada Dasaratha to screen people to have personal contact. Dada Dasaratha used to see the mental color of people and accordingly he used to either reject or send the people for personal contact. Once a very important person came to Jamalpur to have Personal contact.. He was sent to Dada Dasaratha for screening. Dada Dasratha entered his mind and saw the person was unfit for personal contact and so he rejected the person for personal contact. However, some top official of Ananda Marga started to put pressure on Dada Dasaratha to approve the person who was very, very important. Dada was in a dilemma. On one e side were top officials of Marga and othere side was Baba's instruction. Finally, Dada Dasaratha went to see Baba. He told the whole incident. Baba was furious., He told Dada Dasaratha that I gave that power to you only to decide. Nobody else. Do not have to listen to any one. In the end Mr. very, very important person did not get personal contact at that time. Baba was a great master that he did not differentiate between so called important people in society and an ordinary person. His rule was the same for everyone. That was his greatness. Glory to Lord Shrii Ananda Murti Jii.Param pita baba ki Jay.

I WAS NOT ABLE TO FIND SOMEONE TO PLAY THIS DIFFICULT ROLE” 

<b>
</b>It was the year 1987 and I had came from Hong Kong sector to attend Ananda Purnima Dharma Mahacakar. and RDS. I had a very good news report. I was very excited. Most of the central Dadas were happy about my good news report. But when Baba came to take report from usI was singled out by for for poor productivity. Two other Dadas were also singled out. For poor productivity a punishment was given. Negative microvita were put in certain part of body. The first day Baba made some commenst which I did not like. He asked all the Dadas to keep away from me. No one was allowed to be with me and some were taunting. Some were allowed to make bad comment. Some people were scolding for poor out turn. It was big drama. I felt much pain from the negative microvita which were making my whole mind negative. The next day again was same drama: shouting, scolding, making fun. Taunting, etc. My mind was becoming very negative.

It was the third day when Baba ask me to touch the feet of all Dadas and Didis. I did. I was asked to give a talk . Baba told me to give a talk on the effects of negative microvita. He also told me that to tell people that if they will not work for Marga then they will get negative microvita and suffer tremendously. It was a very difficult situation for me.

Baba also said that I gave many talks in South Korea. In a similar I should give a talk and convince everybody present to work for Marga, otherwise they will also get the application of negative microvita. My mind had became negative but I gave a talk although I was in pain. I almost became mad. RDS was over. We all went back to our place. I was staying in the Upper hostel. Around 1 AM SHUBHABUDDHANANDA.JI(VSS SG) and KRSNATMANANDA woke me up without saying a word. They put me in Jeep and I became afraid. They brought me Baba's Quarter in Ananda Nagar. I kept thinking the last three days that Baba has been informed wrongly about me. GS dada was lying on the floor in front of Baba's Door. GS Dada was sleeping. He woke up from sleep and told me that I have been transferred from Hong Kong sector to Manila sector in Bali (Indonesia). He then said to go back to sleep. After that they brought me back to upper hostel. I went to sleep. After Dharma Maha cakra and RDS the meetings were over. I went back to Kolkata.

I wanted to meet Baba personally. I request Dada Keshavananda who was Personal Assistant to Baba to get permission to see him, which I eventually did. My mind was still very very negative when I got the approval, but I became a little happy. I entered in to Baba's room and did sastaunga pranam to Baba and got up. Baba asked about the good news from Hong Kong sector. I started to tell the good news. Baba became very upset and I was asked to leave the room and I left the room Immediately. I was totally shocked, pained, disturbed and confused. The question started to come in my mind about this “good news.” When I came out of the room many dada asked me about my meeting with Baba. I told them that Baba said nothing to me in very angry mood whenever they asked me.
I became very restless and sad. This was worst test given by a Tantric Guru.
I was walking like a mad man in the Lake Gardens. One dada came to me and told me that Baba wanted to see me again. I told him that I do not want to see Baba. I was thinking Baba was going to punish me again. I saw Dada Keshavananda was running towards me. He asked me to go to see Baba. I told him that I do not want to see Baba. My Mind had become totally negative but he grabbed my hand and dragged me and threw me into Baba's room.

When I went in to his room Baba was in Kalyan Sundram Mudra . He said to approach him. His voice was so sweet . It is hard to explain in words. Baba said,
“I was not able to find anybody to play this difficult role. You did it best. I have to teach people. You have had to undergo much suffering in this RDS. Come closer and sing me a song.” All of my negativity and the effects of the negative microvita were gone. I was in a different world and different mood. I sang a song but it was not Prabhat samgiita. It was song of the 60's that I had learned in Dharma cakra when I became a Margii in 1967. I liked the song very much. It was a popular song. I realized I made a big blunder when I came out of His room. I should have sung Prabhat Samgiita. But when you have become mind less, when you do not have your own mind, then you can not decide wrong or right.
Most importantly Baba did not objected when I sang the other song in place of Prabhat samgiita. It was very important for me to see Baba in the Kalyan Sundram Mudra.

 THE GURU’S ORDER MUST BE FOLLOWED 

On March 5th,1967 five Dadas were murdered in Ananda Nagar by a communist inspired mob. Baba made a committee of five members to meet Jyoti Bashu who was then home minister of West Bengal. It was a united front government ruled by Bangla Congress, a breakaway group of the national Congress Party and the Marxist Communist Party. Our five members were sent to meet the home minister, including Acarya Lalan who was the first principal of our Ananda Nagar Degree College. When they went to meet Jyoti Basu, the home minister, they were not allowed to meet him and reported back to Baba. Baba asked a question to them. “Did all committee members go to see Jyoti Basu?” The committee members replied, “we all went except Acarya Sakaldeva.” Baba was a bit upset. He said we must take Acarya Sakaldevaji with you. They all again went to see Jyoti Basu to submit the memorandum. As per instruction of Baba All went to see Jyoti Basu.They were allowed to meet him this time. They had earlier violated the instruction of Guru by not bringing Acarya Sakaldeva and that is why they were not allowed to see Jyoti Basu.
The reason for removing Acarya Sakaladevaji from group to see Jyoti Basu was due to some kind of complex in the mind of the committee members. Acarya Sakaldev Dev Dada had very simple dress. He was very simple looking person, although by profession he was a lawyer. He was a family Acaraya (Grihi Acarya). All others were well-dressed. Acaray Sakala Deva is no longer on this earth. He was the acarya of Acarya Svarupananda Avadhuat, Acarya Sujiit Kumarji, and Acarya Nirmohananda Avadhuta, among others. He remained in Ananda Marga and kept working for the Legal Department until his death. He was a saintly and very sweet-natured person. He was great devotees of Baba. He spent some time with me in Delhi Baba's quarter when I broke my leg in 1999. I also spent time in south ex Delhi Jagrti. when ever I went to India. I always had wonderful Satsanga with him. He is grand father of Prasenjitji who is working with a university in the UK.

### Celibates and Sexuality

There is so much suffering caused by blind sexuality.  So many women are abandoned with children by men whose animal instincts soon pull them elsewhere after a little sensory gratification.  The trail of trauma for the woman may continue as she must struggle to care for the child that have been abandoned.  Or perhaps it was her unfulfilled or frustrated desires that caused the separtion to begin with.  One thing is certain, and it is that there are fewer and fewer examples of harmonious co-existence in human sexual-emotional affairs.  As a culture we have gone back into the stone age as regards to sexuality; only we don't have giraffs and rhinoceros to chase and hunt down in order to channelize this energy and give us some relief.  Instead there is emerging a whole culture of permissiveness and even indulgence.  In truth, this distortion of the sexual tendency leaves many with very little happiness remaining in marriage or interpersonal relationships.  Conversely, I see very little hope in "free love" and open relationships as well.  While some like the way it sounds in theory, I have always seen that somebody always ends up getting hurt.  What we need is love.  Sexuality doesn't necessarily have to ruin this but it usually does if one or both people lack insight into what emotive factors are really driving them deep within.  And it is only by going deep within and seeing these needs that one can find fulfillment in sexuality and relationships.  Very few people can altogether transcend these needs.  These people are very rare and very interesting.

I had a very normal sexual orientation in my youth.  Nothing was too extreme, neither repression or expression.  I had everything I needed to live a happy family life by the time I was finishing the university:  a good companion, a good education, and strong adademic interests that inspired future plans.  However, I discovered meditation and yoga in my second to last year,and then got initiated into a very serious tantric practice.  The next thing I knew I was single, just barely graduated the university due to lack of interest, and was on my way to India to find more truth.  

It was surprising to see how my sexuality began to diminish as I cultivated these practics.  I was still a normal heterosexual; everything still worked, only the fire had died down a little.  The fire was now kindling the desire for deeper spiritual experience.  In those days yoga was still a weird Asian or hippy thing, and not the popular practice that it has become today.  I knew nothing of contemporary yoga.  Fortunately, I learned from some very sincere and serious practitioners from India whom I met at the university.  I was beginning to understand what these older yogis had told me:  that with meditation there is deep insight and this deep insight into the mind and emotions helps one understand not just sex but all mental and biological tendencies.  Tantra Yoga was for me a "libidinal economy," a way of investing energy in other pursuits.  If you put energy in place B, then it is no longer in place A, the original place. As a psychology student I was very well aware with the concepts of suppression and repression and the illnesses and neurosis that they cause.  Transmutation was a different idea, however.  I never studied this in school.  Freud certainly didn't grasp this idea.  Perhaps Jung and the humanists did, however.  What impressed me most about Tantra Yoga wasn't elaborate, sophisticated theories, but the practical results of converting physical desire into mental desire.  And sure enough, my intellectual capacity exploded the more I practiced yoga and meditation and put on the laungota, the yogis loincloth.  Surely you have seen them; the "Tarzan apparatus," or "organic chastity belt."  My mind became so sharp, however I was no longer interested in intellectual pursuits.  All that mattered was finding the source of what was summoning me to make all sorts of renunciations that I never thought possible.  Maybe there was some difficulty in the beginning when I was still in the university surrounded by shapely co-eds.  However, for the most part it was a very sweet renunciation with promises of something greater.  I didn't scorn sexuality.  That would be a direct path to a repressive hell.  I just knew that there was something greater.  The awakening of the kundalini is more bliss than a thousand physical orgasms at once.  And the lover in this tryst is Infinite.

The only problem that I had with my new life-style is that I began to become very sensitive to the environment around me.  I began to feel people very deeply.  For example, instead of noticing that somebody was sad by the tone of their voice or facial expression, I began to feel their state of mind.  I would see somebody from far away on campus and get an impression about their state of mind.  What was especially difficult was when I had to share a room with another person.  I always dreamed of their inner life.  I shared my dreams with them and they were really grateful for the insight into their issues.  I once dreamed that I was in a love affair with a girl from Vermont.  We met together in a barn and....  When I awoke I was perturbed because I hadn't even thought of sex for several months.  I asked myself "why Vermont?  What do I have to do with Vermont?  I remembered that my room-mate was from Vermont.  I asked him if he had a lover there recently.  He just snickered and said, "you caught me!"  I was always very sociable.  However this new energetic sensitivity began to isolate me a little.  However, I had already decided that I wanted to be a monk and accepted this solitary yet blissful position in life.  

By the time I graduated and arrived in India I was having very intense kundalini experiences.  Nobody understood me except my mother and a few close friends.  That soon changed when I arrived at Ananda Nagar.  I felt like I had arrived at a very special learining institution.  It reminded me a little of Hesse's "The Glass Bead Game" only these men were mystics instead of intellectuals.  They did practical work as well.  The yogi whom I spoke of in last week's essay administrated a university in the day and meditated all through the night.  It was good to have a reference for work because I had only spiritual desires and didn't want to do anything else. He was a very advanced meditator and passed through spiritual passions that lasted several years in which he did very little work on the physical plane.  Instead, he was absorbed in the bliss of samadhi.  It is not that he was useless in these times.  Quite the contrary, his elevated vibration inspired many, but also made his little monastic brothers a little jealous of his spiritual achievements.
  
This monk had told me his secrets of transmuting sexual desire on one of our first encounters. He said that he never repressed anything.  I could see that this was true as he was very outspoken.  He openly criticized the crusty theocracy around him and told me with a hearty laugh that Ananda Marga would probably end up killing their own saints some day. He was bold and always expressed himself openly, especially when stubborn or dogmatic people needed a little kick in the rear.

He expressed his ideas about sexuality in a similar manner.  If a women's breasts appeared in his mind during meditation, he just let it happen.  He knew it was impermanent.  He would struggle with the image in his mind, then let his mind enjoy the form.  He still continued to do his meditation during these intrusive "fantasies."  Slowly his state of formless bliss would return.  He said that eventually he would feel compassion for this person and felt that if this desire manifested he could really harm another person emotionally because he was so god-intoxicated.  He knew that these were momentary inclinations  and that for him to take a lover would be a disastrous existential manuever.  This inspired him to embrace her within a radiant white light and to tell her she was dear to the divine and that he would never harm her.  He said that in the end he always saw his "lover" merging into the pure light of the eternal Atman, and returned to his peaceful meditations.

What he told me weren't some exact, specific techniques to make a desire disapper.  Rather it is an attitude and way of life in general that works to transform the mind and body with their desires.  Few people understand the deep reasons for spiritual discipline and what the yogi truly wants to achieve.  This monk was a robust, intelligent, and even handsome person.  He would have had no trouble impressing the ladies.  He was a far cry from the creepy, repressed preist that negates himself through repression and thereby degenerates his libido into dark perversions.  I truly believe he had developed the "heroic" state of meditation in which there remain very few desires and one thereby begins to let go of all inhibitions.  "All things come from god, how can anything harm me?"  Althought this is the attitude of the "heroic" yogi, it is also the motto of the sensualist who loses his/herself in these very same tendencies. Very few people can really become detached from desire without butchering themselves up on the inside with repressions and distortions.

Here I attach some of my writings from A Name to the Nameless related to this subject:

Sexual Tantra

Now I have got your attention!   When speaking about the second, or svadhistana vortex, most people immediately think of sexuality.  The six vrttis or vortexes of the svadhistana vortex are indifference, depression, compulsion, lack of confidence, paranoia, and resentment.  These 6 tendencies have more to do with a lack of sound grounding in one's person rather than just sexuality.  The sexual drive is rooted in the sensory mind, in the first vortex.  The problem is that due to a lack of awareness of one's emotional and physical needs, the sexual desire often gets confounded with these defense mechanisms.
	
It is quite natural and healthy that the sex instinct of the sensory mind finds higher expressions in higher centers.  In a balanced second vortex the sex drive hasn't reached its full maturity but still is not a blind animal instinct.  It has more to do with emotional security, which is the constant theme when discussing the svadhistana vortex.  The problem is that this biological instinct gets tangled up in the distortions and insecurities of the svadhistana, self-conceptual mind. The ego begins to exploit this gratification for its unconscious necessities and there is always suffering and degeneration.
	
I have never taken the so-called “sexual tantra” seriously.  Firstly, because the only people who I have ever known to practice such things were never really balanced.  Sure, they spoke of awareness and love and transmutation and all of those nice things, but it was just all too obvious that they were just sex addicts propelled by unconscious emotions.  They always left a trail of harm.  It may be that there were once some more conscious practices that really didn't trap people into their compulsions, but if they were in fact truthful, then would have to be based on yama and niyama, the ethical base for the practice of yoga.  Most sexual relations ultimately lead one to suffering.  It is a transgression of ahimsa, or no-violence, to project one's selfish urges onto another.  It is no wonder that in the 2 languages that I understand, the crude word for the sexual act can be  synonymous with the words cheating, deceiving, or generally harming another.
The only functional sexual tantra that I have ever known is to first be responsible and never try to harm anyone while at the same time make the indefatigable effort to try and understand the propensities of the second vortex.  The sexual distortions exploit these fundamental vrttis.  The more suffering, separation, and insecurity that there is in the svadhistana level, the more likely that sexuality will try and compensate for these emotions.    However, these necessities are valid and are so profound and fundamental to the personality that they really need to be understood.  Perhaps the blind compulsions are due to an untimely withdrawal of a mother's breast that left one sucking in nothingness.  Or perhaps sexuality has aligned itself with an inner, unconscious resentment and lack of confidence that tries to outwardly seduce and dominate through sexual dominance, games, or manipulation.

I have come to think that when there is no suffering, there is no desire, and where there is no desire, there is no suffering.  This is true for all desires, not just sex.  Few people can really understand this.  Ramakrishna once said that mundane pleasure is like a dog chewing a sharp bone and doesn't realize the “satiation” of this desire comes from its own blood.  It is fear and insecurity that keep us bound into the limitation of a separate self, and therefore bound to selfish desires.  Sometimes, even very highly developed minds overlook these underlying reverberations in the shadows of the emotions.  The pirates to our present state of bliss are often something unseen from our past.  I have found that the study of the vrttis, especially those of the svadhistana, are paramount for finding the psychological balance that permits intuitive, spiritual development.






