---
layout: post
title: Celibates and Sexuality Part II - "The Not-So-Celibate Celibates"
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
---
In part 1 I spoke of my experiences with a very wise and pure yogi regarding sexuality.  The following account is the perfect opposite of what this great man taught.  It will help give us perspective on what is actually successful transmutation of an instinct as compared to what is simply repression and distortion that only further exacerbates and excites an instinct.

I once heard a conversation in which a certain high-ranking member of Ananda Marga, Karunananda, was speaking of how he was once an administrative boss of many monastics.  He didn't know what to do about their sexual repression.  He said the only solution was to find hookers for them.  He had a regular brothel going on.  This was while he was in Hong Kong.  Later, I also heard of rumors that he also had one of these establishments for the big whig central acharyas at Ananda Nagar.  When I heard this I could not mentally process the information.  I had been so close to many saintly monks and had such great respect for Ananda Marga that I simply couldn't register this new, dissonant information in my head.  My ears heard it without a doubt, but my mind didn't know what to do with the new information.  It was clearly the strongest case of cognitive dissonance that I ever experienced.  I probably would have suppressed this information, distorted it, or have made up an excuse if it had not been for my friend who spoke to me about this shock a few minutes later.  He was present for the conversation too and was a little more mature in the ways of the world than I.  He didn't have any problem scoffing at this.  I, on the other hand, was struggling to assimilate it all.  Seeing all of those central monks  coming to visit him every day gave me the greatest suspicions.  "If he does this, then is everybody else doing it too?  Are all of these high-ranking monks clients in his brothel? "Does this mean all of Ananda Marga could all be a lie?"  These were the voices inside of me that I didn't want to hear.  A month later was the famous Purulia Arms Drop in which Ananda Marga monks tried to pull off an international arms deal.  It failed miserably and I, because I was in the wrong place at the wrong time, found myself imprisoned, then put under house arrest while our case was scheduled for the Indian Supreme Court.  

Just after the arms drop Karunananda kicked me out of the hostel where I was staying because I was under surveillance and he was also guilty of helping this failed scheme and didn't want the police anywhere near him. I could see the fear in his eyes that revealed his complicity.  He was terrified of me and didn't want me near him.

Chidghananda, one of the great acharyas and early disciples of Anandamurti, became my closest guide as well as best friend.  He accepted me into the hostel he managed the night Karunananda had booted me out.  There was also a big commotion going on that night.  The locals were beating on drums and the monks thought they were war drums.  All of the monks were in a panic to escape to the train station.  They thought there would be another massacre by the communists who gave money, alcohol and weapons to the locals to attack the Ananda Marga ashram.  Chidghananda just told me to lock the door and meditate all night.  If I die I will go happy, he said with a sweet smile.  It was his way of saying all will be fine.  I had just met him before this incident. He went to jail voluntarily with me so as to protect me from the forces that had me trapped in a situation in which I had no understanding.  He was concerned that we would be tortured like the monks who were tortured by the police on several earlier occasions.  This was the best experience of my life, spending long hours meditating with this great yogi, in jail and later under 6 months of house arrest while our case was passing through the Indian Supreme Court.  Although his mind was deeply connected with the Supreme Consciousness through his spiritual practice, he was always the most simple yet highly rational person.  

Chidghananda once told me the most incredible story.  Several years earlier Anandmurti once was speaking about microvita and explained that only Taraka Brahma (the Supreme Consciounes acting as Liberator) can cause a sex to change without an operation or drugs.  It is possible to change sex with the application of microvita, he explained.  At the same time Karunananda began to beg Anandamurti to not turn him into a woman.  He sat their crying and saying that he felt a change in his organs and that he was becoming a "lady."  "Baba, please don't make me a lady!," he cried.  Was this spectacle a “jedi mind trick” of a humorous, loving guru giving a scolding his rascally, macho disciple, or the special powers of Taraka Brahma?  Who really knows. 

Chidghananda was too serious about such things to spread gossip.  I think he was trying to tell us all something.  It has a little something to do with the law of opposites, of Heraclitian enantiodromia drama.  When one goes a little too far with any form of machismo, whether physical, mental, or spiritual, the opposite, repressed and distorted force finds a way to crack the surface of one’s near-psychotic, one-sided mind and forces a radical change.   "Okay macho man, now try being a woman," is what the law of karma wants to teach them.  This may explain all of the bizzare sexual distortions with the monks nowadays.  The cover of so many of these leaders has been blown.  When younger monks lose respect for their elders, they lose faith in their own capacities as well.  It is much easier to fall when one loses one's confidence.  Nature, or Prakrti, doesn't let it slide, however.  This kind of abuse causes very strong reactions.  Sexuality is a very delicate energy and to damage it or cause distortions or harm has very intense consequences.  These monks later have to live duplicitous lives and perhaps develop perversions and extreme indulgences because of this repression and distortion that escapes with a wild madness.  It is much saner to live a normal, family life.  It is difficult to straighten out these libido knots once they are established.  One may not finish working them out in one life-time. One is perhaps reborn with all kinds of complexes, homosexuality, or sexual identification problems.  I believe Anandamurti showed Karunananda this law of opposites to try to get him to change course.  He knew that if he continued with his machismo, then he would harm others and himself.  "If he can fall, then what about me?," is what most of us would think.  
