---
layout: post
title: Form and Formless
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
---

“Brahma alone is the guru.” This saying from the Upanishad represents a very universal conception of the deity. Brahma literally means that which is great and makes others great. In other words, Brahma is the Consciousness of the Macrocosm, of the entire universe. The guru is none other than the Supreme Consciousness and cannot be tainted by partiality nor prejudices nor any relative projection of a messiah or human guru. What is simply is. If the Supreme Consciousness can create this entire universe, then surely there is an unmediated, direct way to communicate with me, a little microcosm in this Macrocosm. "Am I a secluded figure, in the vast, a little ameagre? No no no no I am not alone, the great is with me."</p>
<p lang="es-ES">And one could imagine that such a Macrocosmic deity is not a petty god of a certain country or class or society of exclusive human beings that deserve his mercy. The tiny little human microcosmic mind with its prejudices and attachments finally understands that “god” is not to be found through any finite form, material nor mental. The sacred books and messiahs and Buddhas were just approximations of a an inner, mystical truth. Only those who dare question the root of their being free of these appendages could possibly find the root of their being free of all relative conditioning. Non-dualism, or Advaita, is the idea that ultimately the consciousness of the individual microcosm and the Macrocosm are fundamentally the same. This is not to say that my consciousness has become the consciousness of the universe, that the ego becomes god. Rather, my consciousness has been taken into, accepted, transformed, digested, and finally assimilated into the living, working consciousness of the Macrocosm or Brahma. The microcosm is no longer a separate entity creating negative reactions and contaminating the world while fleeing from one empty dream to the next. The illumined microcosm is a mental cell unified with other mental cells that form a Macrocosm, a collective body of minds. Here, one can't bring attachments, prejudices, nor any other petty ego control issue. The moment they arise, the Macrocosm knocks you off of your feet. It takes much time and evolution and trial and error to find a flow of unity into the Macrocosm. One must unlearn the socially-conditioned and indoctrinated ego along with all of its hereditary mental and biological instincts in order to learn the ways of Brahma.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">Only those born with developed intuitive faculties can understand these truths without following teachers or paths. Life just somehow teaches these inner lessons. I suspect that these minds are “primed” with this knowledge from birth and that it was probably learned earlier. Plato saw all knowledge as something that has already been learned. What we experience here in the finite world are recollections of truths already known. Genius, according to this view, is nothing more than having at one's disposal what has already been learned. Spiritual orientation is innately developed in some just as art or music or mathematics is innately developed in others.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">The idea of a human guru or a spiritual teacher is to help one understand these fundamental cardinal truths of non-dualism. A guru is one who has walked that path and is capable of showing it to others. However, most of the time, a concept of guru is but an opiate for a desperate personality separated from the life of the universe due to its ignorance and egoism. Belief is mostly desperate compulsion and the idea of a guru is often a 2-edged sword. Normally, when people speak to you about gurus they want to sell you on some idea. They often want others to bandy together with them under some omnipotent messiah, guru, and their religion or institution. They don't really want to have their own experiences but prefer just to adopt the ideas and traditions of others to find security and refuge. The more absolute the idea, the more effective is the opiate and the more placated is the compulsion of the fearful and separate little ego to grasp on to some form of meaning.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">If one works through these limited ideas of a guru, then perhaps one can really understand something of another human being that is wise and compassionate and only has your well-being in mind.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">I came to believe that Anandamurti was a true guru. I never met him in physical form. I was convinced of his special character because of his disciples. These exceptional human beings considered Anandamurti as their guru and that naturally gives one a certain reverence toward their teacher. There was once a Sufi teacher who knew of Anandamurti and respected him greatly. He sent one of his disciples to see him. The disciple went to see him but only saw an absurd show of dogmatic followers running about in an absurd guru-devotee show. The master rebuked him and told him he was only judging external appearances. What he should have seen is that the master (Anandamurti) was so great that he accepted all people, even clowns.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">Fortunately, I made it past the show of spiritual salesmen and was able to meet some of the more mature disciples of Anandamurti, both monastic and lay. In general, the community of Ananda Marga was very respectable. There were people from all strata of society working and moving together under the inspiration of Anandamurti. The problems mostly resided with the monastic institution after the death of Anandamurti. The more mature meditators didn't have any doubts about the divinity of their teacher but were never dogmatic about it nor tried to impose it on others. They put their meaning in doing practical work and sincere spiritual practice. Near these mature disciples one could feel a certain lightness and expansion of mind that helps one to realize that the guru is deep within, inside of one's deepest sense of peace. This influence made meditation much clearer and peaceful. It seemed impossible to cling to any form of teacher when one feels at one with the living Macrocosm of Brahma. I began to see an inner light that radiated into every form that entered my mind. I saw the same spirit both within and without. I became certain that I was not my body nor my mind and so how was it possible to cling to some human guru form? However, none of these elder teachers ever tried to impose this form upon me and the stories that I well tell of them will hopefully help other people appreciate the philosophy and spiritual practices of Anandamurti.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">When I first arrived at Ananda Nagar I met a yogi who told me some very useful secrets. He immediately took me into his confidence. He looked at me intensely and I felt like I was being scanned. The first thing he told me was a tip of how to transmute sexual energies. I had never heard a monk talk about things so openly, yet with such intelligence and purity. Far from being perverse or hypocritical fantasies of a celibate monk, it was the most practical insight into desire that I had heard of in my life. As a young single man I greatly appreciated his insights. The second important thing he told me is that some day Ananda Marga will probably end up killing their own saints. He laughed heartily but he was serious. It was inconceivable to me at the time. Furthermore, it seemed like heresy because everybody else was only talking how great Ananda Marga was and how Anandmurti left all of his power and grace in this organization! Now, 20 years later, I see what he meant.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">Later, on another visit, he told me how yogis can leave their bodies and travel through the inner dimensions of time and space. He said it was another reality in which there exist not these relative factors of time and space. It was a Dreamland that was even more real than physical reality, a kind of astral repository of all human experience and memory-past, present and future. He said that you could know whatever you needed to know and meet whoever you needed to meet on this plane of reality. I was eager to visit this Hall of the Immortals. He told me how to leave my body and at what time of night I could do it. I left the conversation with a desire to see if I could somehow know something of the teacher of these great men that I was meeting and was inspired by. Later that night I followed the prescribed technique. Nothing happened at that moment. Later I slept and then it started to work. I awoke completely with a holy jolt of spiritual lightning in my spine. I could feel the kundalini rising. I could feel it swishing through the cerebral spinal fluid that was concentrating inside the brain. When it entered inside the head there was only light and sound, every color was within white and every sound within Om. All through the night there was a whirling vortex of energy moving around the crown of my head. It had no form, just sound and color. I was entirely awake but the more the kundalini rose the more I entered into a very conscious state of trance. It was more real than anything I had ever experienced. Rather than a world with forms and mass, all was very fine and soothing vibration. I understood how the crown chakra and the pineal gland were the microcosmic receptor and channel to enter into the formless, infinite Macrocosm. Everything made sense as pure idea. There was no fear or uncertainty of this unknown reality. All was bliss and I felt quite free and pure. I realized that my body was lying on my bed in a trance but that my consciousness was very clearly in the Present without names and forms. Every once in a while I would see the form of Anandamurti and the whole vibrational scene would turn into something more like a dream, only much more real and lucid. I thought “this is a dream”, but I knew it was a very special sort of dream. I still to this day recall it just as clear as a “waking” state of consciousness.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">To this day I am still trying to realize the significance of these detailed conversations with the guru apparition. Perhaps it wasn't absolutely necessary for him to appear as a human to another human in a state of lucid dream, but it was a very personal and affective touch from something or someone very sublime. As the years pass by these revelations become even clearer and life makes more sense. There was only so much I could understand as a little spiritual fledgling in my early twenties. They were experiences that by their very nature need a full life-time to be realized. Although I have never preached or tried to convince others about the divinity of Anandamurti, I have never ever doubted this influence in my life. For so many years I didn't even speak of him. It was a subtle struggle of reconciling form with formlessness, and the idea that the guru archetype may actually appear with a human form. I always considered the latter as a relative possibility and never wanted my experiences to be some kind of “proof” for the ego to make fixed ideas about the infinite. This is a subtle error that causes great damage to an otherwise pure ideology, whether it is one's personal set of ideas or the ideology of a spiritual society. If mystery, subtlety, and free speculationare substituted by concreteness and conformity, then only dogma will remain. Human beings armed with exclusive ideas always end up creating trouble for themselves and others. I always try to refer to Anandamurti's philosophical ideas that the Supreme Consciousness is infinite and formless. With those who tried to impose the absolute form of the guru, I only saw religion in the making and soon learned that there was no sense arguing these matters. Over the years I have taught formless meditation with an entirely different system to others without referring to Anandamurti yet many of my students continue to have similar profound experiences and dreams of Anandamurti. It is something that only continues to grow silently inside of me and others. He himself only said that he was, is, and will remain a mystery. However, the philosophy he left is very clear, rational and lucid. I hope others find something special in his works that I am sharing. They were compiled as books, but all of them are based on talks that he gave over several decades to thousands of people.</p>
