---
layout: post
title: Stories of Pluma Blanca 
tags: [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
---

Pluma Blanca always had a very elevated vibration. When people came near him they would begin to sway in a counter-clockwise direction. Sometimes their heads would begin to tilt and subtly twirl in an almost imperceptible circular motion. He explained that whether you are speaking of the Cosmic Nucleus of Hunab Ku or the Conscious Nucleus of the Atman radiating behind our minds, the movement around either a physical or spiritual nucleus is always a play of the centripetal and centrifugal forces. They have the same dynamics on all planes of being. There are physical vortexes of motion in the physical world where there is the weight and gravity of matter and also vortexes of subtle, mental energy that act and interact with thoughts, feelings, and perceptions. To harmonize the macrocosm with the microcosm, the universe with the individual, one must find this secret flow of Tao both within the mind and in one’s world, planet, and its plants and animals.
On the outside Pluma Blanca’s ancestors studied the movement of the planets and the natural cycles. This practice was never disconnected to the internal practice of meditation. Meditation is the science of seeing behind all of the vortexes and movements of the human mind. A mind that is pure sees into and understands the movements around Hunab Ku, the Cosmic Nucleus that is within us all. Every human being that has truly searched has seen into this great treasure deep within a balanced human existence. We understand that there is always something pure, eternally renewed when we live in harmony with creation. This inspiration has never abandoned us, only we have forgotten It.

### A Not So Fleeting Romance

Pluma Blanca (White Feather), or Quetzal Manik (in maya), came by the clinic for a surprise visit a few years ago. It was my first time to see him. He seemed to know all about me but didn’t say very much. He hardly even spoke Spanish. He liked to talk to me about Tantra and share ideas of the Tantra of the Mayas, the lineage of meditation and healing that he learned from his fore-fathers. Although a healer of all types of diseases, he was fundamentally a mystic who loved to meditate in the forest. He was my wife’s teacher, an indigenous Maya from Campeche. When my wife was attending a European patient he went to the clinic and entered the treatment room directly. He grabbed a pencil and a piece of paper and then wrote down a list of names on the paper. The names were the first and last names of the lovers the young woman had in the last year. The list was a little too long.
He would speak in Maya but nobody understood him. He then began to write to her in Spanish while somebody else translated to her in English. He explained that when humans have sexual intercourse their minds remain energetically connected for 7 years. There is a subtle transmission and continued connection of mental energy shared between the 2 entities. This may be something very pure and harmonious or it may be painful or even degrading, depending on the nature of the relationship. Even though they may never see, nor even think of each-other again, there remain subtle mental impressions that “reside” within each-other.
Another complicating factor is the mental confusion that one carries if one changes or has frequent partners. The imbalanced, frustrated, and distorted energies of others sympathetically vibrate with the minds of an individual person, and vice-versa. It sounded as if he was speaking of the transmission of a mental virus in much the same way as a physical virus, but with the mind and its clusters of memories and emotions as the vehicle of transmission directly into another mind. Instead of being infected physically, one remains “infected” by another’s mind for 7 years. A part of that person’s soul, or subtle mind is carried inside and continues to live inside of another, for better or for worse. The soul becomes an over-crowded house instead of a silent temple.
He explained quite compassionately that her emotional instability was only worsened by her romantic adventures and were gradually making her physically ill. She was an attractive young woman with very liberal values who simply didn’t understand these ideas before he explained it to her. She didn’t feel threatened nor judged, and seriously pondered his diagnosis. I believe that her conscience understood what Pluma Blanca was communicating. She knew she was suffering and wasn’t happy and somebody had just probed into her private life to offer her some clues as to how to understand her confusions. Before the treatment she was terrorizing all of the young spiritually-disciplined boys around here with her tiny, mini skirts. After that treatment she put on a more modest skirt.
### Om in C 

Although Pluma Blanca was born 114 years on this planet earlier than when I met him, he was a perfect child who always liked to share his toys with me. This little Indian always radiates joy, at least when he isn’t scolding people. On one of our first meetings he just looks at me and mentally says, “first go into silence, hear Om in breathlessness and then take note of its tone.” I could hear the Om sound vibrating within and it seemed to correspond something close to the tone of C. I got my flute out and played a C and it sounded like I was playing at the same tone as the sacred Om sound that was resounding around my pineal gland. Later he said, “Now hear it in C-sharp.” My head went back and I started to lose contact with the outside world and be absorbed into a great white silence that the Om at C-sharp was taking me into.

When I came back down he said, “now what is in your mind?” I closed my eyes and saw so many images and histories and stories flash before my mind. He continued: “You will verify all of this in the next few years. It will all come to pass.”

These events indeed are coming to pass, like entries in an apocalyptic diary. It was the saddest story ever conceived, although the story should soon change for the better. My friend could see the future and help his friends to do the same. Spiritual experiences like this don’t happen so regularly as it is too powerful of an experience for most to digest. The present is challenging enough without knowing the future. Ignorance is sometimes a blessing, but Pluma Blanca knew that it was necessary to understand these things.

### Nahuatl 

Pluma Blanca once told me that a Nahuatl is a healer that sees not just into the minds of animals but also into those of humans. Beyond even seeing into the souls of humans the true Nahuatl sees into the Oversoul, the conscious substatum that unites us all. He says that to enter a human mind is usually more difficult and dangerous than entering into a mind of an animal. Humans are less innocent and their mental contents may make such a rare and pure entity as a Nahuatl ill if he or she resonates too close with other human emotional turmoil. Animals see us as gods and naturally resonate with and reflect the mental states of their gods. The nahuatl prefers to see the mere reflection of a human’s problems by “hacking” the minds of the animals under their care. That way, the contact with the other human mind is not too direct and doesn’t affect the seer and also the minds of those seen into. Also,people often feel strangely transparent and often uncomfortable when they feel that another can see through them. Animals, like innocent children, may give very truthful and unbiased information and just tell it like it is. Although a dog can’t speak, they reflect most of this human resonance unconsciously and what lives and vibrates in the mind of the master is also there in the mind of the canine disciple. A nahuatl may learn many things about you through your dog, horse, or even donkey!

It has been said that very developed tantric yogis have the power of mind over matter in that whatever they put their focused, disciplined minds on will certainly materialize. Though quite rare, there have been numerous examples of yogis with these bizarre qualities through the ages.

One day Pluma Blanca (White Feather) came to visit bon Nadie at Rancho el Misterio. He spoke much of this phenomenon with practical examples. He said that developed shaman really can even have some degree of control over the weather. This amazed bon Nadie the most as Pluma Blanca was so calm and unsensational while speaking about these abilities. Rather, he took these truths very seriously. He always warned about these abilities, however. “What if you lose control of an emotion and end up manifesting your deepest shadow tendencies?,” he said. He was 110 years old and never spent much time in the cities but he really did understand modern people. The most amazing and diffult thing to believe is when he told bon Nadie that Nahuatls (those who enter the minds of animals) are real and that they can look into the Oversoul of humanity and into the Divine Eye that sees past, present, and future. They can see all minds, not just those of animals.  He said that it is nice to see a human mind from time to time, but he mostly just sees animal minds in human form.

On the way back south, bon Nadie took him to a store to buy some food for the trip. It was an elite part of town. Most people had skin the same color of bon Nadie’s. However, instead of the usual ignorance or normal sociability toward his person, he noticed that some people gave him nasty, scornful looks. They looked even worse at Pluma Blanca. Bon Nadie remained still, just looking back at them. He was in a light, dreamy trance  and saw so much bad history, impunity, suffering and hateful prejudice behind these people’s expressions. He was angry at their ideas and where they come from but still couldn’t judge these superficial people, except to say that they are superficial people.

One woman was particularly rude and pushed him to the edge of his patience. She thought that bon Nadie was one of her kind based on appearances. When he didn’t respond to her flirtations, she became downright spiteful and said under hear breath, “maldito indio” or “damned indian.” He wanted to respond and say:  “because my heart is the same as my friends, then I too am a damned indian.” However, Pluma Blanca came over laughing and pulled him out of the store. “Let your wife pay, we will wait out here,” he said. I knew that he knew I was a little annoyed. He sait quietly for several minutes and then responded: “They will get their lessons very soon.” Now Pluma Blanca was known as an oracle and I wasn’t sure if he was speaking about the future of the world and all of the racists and imperialists or if he was talking about this one woman in particular.

At that moment the racist woman came out of the store and Pluma Blanca began to giggle like a small child. It was as if he had done something naughty and was trying to hide it. A stray dog approached the woman, raised his leg, and soaked her stockings.

### Non-Dualism Cures All Disease

I have a friend, a recluse yogi, who has the ability to heal any disease. He is still alive, but considering the state of collective insanity on the planet, that could very well change. These big brothers have too much burden to carry right now. So that a little dharmic, moral order can begin to influence human society again, there must first be some major cleansing. He says that people trapped in the human, materialistic urban matrices are becoming physically and mentally ill due to the inability to harmonize their physical, mental, and spiritual strata of existence with society, nature, the planet and the universe. This recluse friend doubts if modern humans really are fit to continue evolving on this planet. His opinion matters because to me because I have seen him heal many incurable diseases simply by looking at somebody. These people healed aren't patients because he isn't a healer, at least he doesn't consider himself one. They are just people who happen to cross his path at the opportune time. I dare not give away his identity or his whereabouts because the people would devour him with their troubles.

He sees all illness as a projection of mental conflicts or imbalances. By intuitively seeing the illness as distorted thoughts or repressed emotions such as fear, anger, or insecurity, he sees how this flow of mental energy interacts with the organs and glands of the body. Maybe this person can't tell you so much scientifically about the immune system, T4 cells, etc., but he has been known to heal cancer. Maybe one can't empirically verify how he does it but it is easy to verify that the cancer disappeared. As a close friend, I ask him how he does it. He doesn't give away many secrets if one isn't first capable of understanding them, but one thing I have gathered is that he has some way of taking these illnesses into his own being, like the classic “sin eaters.” Perhaps the cancer of one person gives him diarrhea for a few days, or AIDS makes him physically weak for a few weeks. His advanced meditation and yoga practice constantly heal him of these illnesses. If he stops meditating or spends too much time in the city with the mundane, then he gets ill.

What he shared with me is that all illnesses are clusters of unprocessed, unconscious thoughts and emotions that attack the physical body by first creating imbalances in the glandular system. For him not to have the same illness, he must process the thoughts and emotions of the other as if they were his own. If he doesn't understand these mental patterns behind the illness, then his physical body suffers the same symptoms as the afflicted. I can't get him to tell me how he does it exactly. He is smug in his non-dualist philosophy and simply says that there is only one being in the universe and this being is only understood by the unprejudiced, tranquil and insightful minds. By understanding this fundamental truth, the mind becomes free of all complexes and relieves the body of having to bear the cross of all of the ego's ignorance and unconsciousness that create illness and disharmony. He really can explain a little more, but prefers to let people figure it out for themselves.

### Form And Formless

“Brahma alone is the guru.” This saying from the Upanishad represents a very universal conception of the deity. Brahma literally means that which is great and makes others great. In other words, Brahma is the Consciousness of the Macrocosm, of the entire universe. The guru is none other than the Supreme Consciousness and cannot be tainted by partiality nor prejudices nor any relative projection of a messiah or human guru. What is, simply is. <!--more-->If the Supreme Consciousness can create this entire universe, then surely there is an unmediated, direct way to communicate with me, a little microcosm in this Macrocosm. "Am I a secluded figure, in the vast, a little ameagre? No no no no I am not alone, the great is with me."

And one could imagine that such a Macrocosmic deity is not a petty god of a certain country or class or society of exclusive human beings that deserve his mercy. The tiny little human microcosmic mind with its prejudices and attachments finally understands that “god” is not to be found through any finite form, material nor mental. The sacred books and messiahs and Buddhas were just approximations of a an inner, mystical truth. Only those who dare question the root of their being free of these appendages could possibly find the root of their being free of all relative conditioning. Non-dualism, or Advaita, is the idea that ultimately the consciousness of the individual microcosm and the Macrocosm are fundamentally the same. This is not to say that my consciousness has become the consciousness of the universe, that the ego becomes god. Rather, my consciousness has been taken into, accepted, transformed, digested, and finally assimilated into the living, working consciousness of the Macrocosm or Brahma. The microcosm is no longer a separate entity creating negative reactions and contaminating the world while fleeing from one empty dream to the next. The illumined microcosm is a mental cell unified with other mental cells that form a Macrocosm, a collective body of minds. Here, one can't bring attachments, prejudices, nor any other petty ego control issue. The moment they arise, the Macrocosm knocks you off of your feet. It takes much time and evolution and trial and error to find a flow of unity into the Macrocosm. One must unlearn the socially-conditioned and indoctrinated ego along with all of its hereditary mental and biological instincts in order to learn the ways of Brahma.

Only those born with developed intuitive faculties can understand these truths without following teachers or paths. Life just somehow teaches these inner lessons. I suspect that these minds are “primed” with this knowledge from birth and that it was probably learned earlier. Plato saw all knowledge as something that has already been learned. What we experience here in the finite world are recollections of truths already known. Genius, according to this view, is nothing more than having at one's disposal what has already been learned. Spiritual orientation is innately developed in some just as art or music or mathematics is innately developed in others.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">The idea of a human guru or a spiritual teacher is to help one understand these fundamental cardinal truths of non-dualism. A guru is one who has walked that path and is capable of showing it to others. However, most of the time, a concept of guru is but an opiate for a desperate personality separated from the life of the universe due to its ignorance and egoism. Belief is mostly desperate compulsion and the idea of a guru is often a 2-edged sword. Normally, when people speak to you about gurus they want to sell you on some idea. They often want others to bandy together with them under some omnipotent messiah, guru, and their religion or institution. They don't really want to have their own experiences but prefer just to adopt the ideas and traditions of others to find security and refuge. The more absolute the idea, the more effective is the opiate and the more placated is the compulsion of the fearful and separate little ego to grasp on to some form of meaning

If one works through these limited ideas of a guru, then perhaps one can really understand something of another human being that is wise and compassionate and only has your well-being in mind.

I came to believe that Anandamurti was a true guru. I never met him in physical form. I was convinced of his special character because of his disciples. These exceptional human beings considered Anandamurti as their guru and that naturally gives one a certain reverence toward their teacher. There was once a Sufi teacher who knew of Anandamurti and respected him greatly. He sent one of his disciples to see him. The disciple went to see him but only saw an absurd show of dogmatic followers running about in an absurd guru-devotee show. The master rebuked him and told him he was only judging external appearances. What he should have seen is that the master (Anandamurti) was so great that he accepted all people, even clowns.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">Fortunately, I made it past the show of spiritual salesmen and was able to meet some of the more mature disciples of Anandamurti, both monastic and lay. In general, the community of Ananda Marga was very respectable. There were people from all strata of society working and moving together under the inspiration of Anandamurti. The problems mostly resided with the monastic institution after the death of Anandamurti. The more mature meditators didn't have any doubts about the divinity of their teacher but were never dogmatic about it nor tried to impose it on others. They put their meaning in doing practical work and sincere spiritual practice. Near these mature disciples one could feel a certain lightness and expansion of mind that helps one to realize that the guru is deep within, inside of one's deepest sense of peace. This influence made meditation much clearer and peaceful. It seemed impossible to cling to any form of teacher when one feels at one with the living Macrocosm of Brahma. I began to see an inner light that radiated into every form that entered my mind. I saw the same spirit both within and without. I became certain that I was not my body nor my mind and so how was it possible to cling to some human guru form? However, none of these elder teachers ever tried to impose this form upon me and the stories that I well tell of them will hopefully help other people appreciate the philosophy and spiritual practices of Anandamurti.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">When I first arrived at Ananda Nagar I met a yogi who told me some very useful secrets. He immediately took me into his confidence. He looked at me intensely and I felt like I was being scanned. The first thing he told me was a tip of how to transmute sexual energies. I had never heard a monk talk about things so openly, yet with such intelligence and purity. Far from being perverse or hypocritical fantasies of a celibate monk, it was the most practical insight into desire that I had heard of in my life. As a young single man I greatly appreciated his insights. The second important thing he told me is that some day Ananda Marga will probably end up killing their own saints. He laughed heartily but he was serious. It was inconceivable to me at the time. Furthermore, it seemed like heresy because everybody else was only talking how great Ananda Marga was and how Anandmurti left all of his power and grace in this organization! Now, 20 years later, I see what he meant.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">Later, on another visit, he told me how yogis can leave their bodies and travel through the inner dimensions of time and space. He said it was another reality in which there exist not these relative factors of time and space. It was a Dreamland that was even more real than physical reality, a kind of astral repository of all human experience and memory-past, present and future. He said that you could know whatever you needed to know and meet whoever you needed to meet on this plane of reality. I was eager to visit this Hall of the Immortals. He told me how to leave my body and at what time of night I could do it. I left the conversation with a desire to see if I could somehow know something of the teacher of these great men that I was meeting and was inspired by. Later that night I followed the prescribed technique. Nothing happened at that moment. Later I slept and then it started to work. I awoke completely with a holy jolt of spiritual lightning in my spine. I could feel the kundalini rising. I could feel it swishing through the cerebral spinal fluid that was concentrating inside the brain. When it entered inside the head there was only light and sound, every color was within white and every sound within Om. All through the night there was a whirling vortex of energy moving around the crown of my head. It had no form, just sound and color. I was entirely awake but the more the kundalini rose the more I entered into a very conscious state of trance. It was more real than anything I had ever experienced. Rather than a world with forms and mass, all was very fine and soothing vibration. I understood how the crown chakra and the pineal gland were the microcosmic receptor and channel to enter into the formless, infinite Macrocosm. Everything made sense as pure idea. There was no fear or uncertainty of this unknown reality. All was bliss and I felt quite free and pure. I realized that my body was lying on my bed in a trance but that my consciousness was very clearly in the Present without names and forms. Every once in a while I would see the form of Anandamurti and the whole vibrational scene would turn into something more like a dream, only much more real and lucid. I thought “this is a dream”, but I knew it was a very special sort of dream. I still to this day recall it just as clear as a “waking” state of consciousness.</p>
<p lang="es-ES">To this day I am still trying to realize the significance of these detailed conversations with the guru apparition. Perhaps it wasn't absolutely necessary for him to appear as a human to another human in a state of lucid dream, but it was a very personal and affective touch from something or someone very sublime. As the years pass by these revelations become even clearer and life makes more sense. There was only so much I could understand as a little spiritual fledgling in my early twenties. They were experiences that by their very nature need a full life-time to be realized. Although I have never preached or tried to convince others about the divinity of Anandamurti, I have never ever doubted this influence in my life. For so many years I didn't even speak of him. It was a subtle struggle of reconciling form with formlessness, and the idea that the guru archetype may actually appear with a human form. I always considered the latter as a relative possibility and never wanted my experiences to be some kind of “proof” for the ego to make fixed ideas about the infinite. This is a subtle error that causes great damage to an otherwise pure ideology, whether it is one's personal set of ideas or the ideology of a spiritual society. If mystery, subtlety, and free speculationare substituted by concreteness and conformity, then only dogma will remain. Human beings armed with exclusive ideas always end up creating trouble for themselves and others. I always try to refer to Anandamurti's philosophical ideas that the Supreme Consciousness is infinite and formless. With those who tried to impose the absolute form of the guru, I only saw religion in the making and soon learned that there was no sense arguing these matters. Over the years I have taught formless meditation with an entirely different system to others without referring to Anandamurti yet many of my students continue to have similar profound experiences and dreams of Anandamurti. It is something that only continues to grow silently inside of me and others. He himself only said that he was, is, and will remain a mystery. However, the philosophy he left is very clear, rational and lucid. I hope others find something special in his works that I am sharing. They were compiled as books, but all of them are based on talks that he gave over several decades to thousands of people.


